GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
11 October 1993 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 27 September 1993, at 10.30 a.m. 


Temporary President: Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) 
President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the Paragraphs 

Opening of the session 1 - 11 
1 Election of officers and appointment of the 

General Committee 12 - 28 
2 Applications for membership of the Agency 29 - 39 
3 Message from the Secretary-General of the 

United Nations 40 - 68 
4 Statement by the Director General 69-144 
6 Voluntary contributions to the Technical 

Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1994 145 -147 
8 General debate and annual report for 1992 148-167 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Republic of Korea 148 - 158 
Japan 159 - 167 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-03735 (II) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 2 

ABACC 
CTBT 
DPRK 
ECOSOC 
FAO 
G-7 
IFMAP 
NPT 
RADWASS 
RCA 

SAGSI 
TACF 
TC 
Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNDP 
UNSCOM 
WANO 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 

Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

Economic and Social Council (UN) 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

Group of Seven 

Advisory Programme for the Management of Irradiated Fuel 

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 

Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 

Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

(for Asia and the Pacific) 

Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 

Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 

Technical co-operation 

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 

United Nations Development Programme 

United Nations Special Commission 

World Association of Nuclear Operators 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 

page 3 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-seventh regular session 
of the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the delegates to 
observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, after welcoming all the participants, said 
that the Agency's smooth operation in Vienna owed a great deal to the unstinting support of 
the Federal Government of Austria which he thanked on behalf of all the participants. 
4. The current session of the General Conference was taking place at a momentous point 
in the Agency's existence. Striking events had taken place in South Africa and the Middle 
East which had had repercussions on the Agency's functions. Challenges had been mounted 
against the Agency and subtle attempts made to erode its credibility and authority. It was 
reassuring that those challenges had been met, confidence in the Agency had been boosted 
and its membership had increased. 
5. The challenges had been particularly evident in the area of safeguards. Prompted by 
failures on the part of some Member States to meet their obligations under their safeguards 
agreements, the Board of Governors had completed a review of the safeguards system and, 
as a result, more extensive use was being made of data collected by the Agency and a new 
system of universal reporting by both importers and exporters of nuclear material and 
equipment had been instituted. The Agency's right to perform special inspections under 
existing safeguards agreements had been reinforced, its information base broadened and more 
discriminating use was being made of safeguards information to enhance the Agency's 
capacity to detect clandestine activities. 
6. Concern about the safety of nuclear installations had stimulated research, 
development, and the application of advanced technologies. Nuclear safety culture was 
growing. With the assistance and co-operation of the Secretariat, Member States were 
actively considering a new draft safety convention which it was hoped would be adopted in 
the not-too-distant future. Together with a draft convention on liability for nuclear damage, 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 4 

a safety convention would provide the international legal framework required for the safe 
development of nuclear power. He urged Member States to give full support to those 
ventures. 

7. Projected growth in the nuclear power sector to meet future energy needs had 
resulted in intensified co-operation among Member States and between the Agency and other 
multilateral organizations. The implications of nuclear energy for the environment and 
development were also under close scrutiny. 
8. It was imperative that Member States pursue vigorously the promotional aspects of 
the Agency's work by accelerating and expanding the application of nuclear energy through 
the transfer of nuclear technology. That was essential if the majority of the Agency's 
Member States, including those of the African region, were to identify fully with the 
Agency's work. The mistaken impression that the Agency's technical co-operation activities 
were of secondary importance should not be allowed to gain ground. 
9. The prospects for a multilateral non-proliferation regime had never been brighter. 
South Africa's accession to the NPT and the continuing efforts to draw up a treaty on a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa were a welcome move to emulate Latin America which 
was completely committed to non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In 
the Middle East, steady progress continued to be made towards the application of IAEA 
safeguards to all nuclear activities and installations. It was also encouraging that all five 
nuclear-weapon States were now party to the NPT. As the NPT Extension Conference which 
was to be held in 1995 approached, the role of the Agency in strengthening the nonproliferation 
regime would attract great interest. Events over the past year had shown how 
dependent the Agency was on the goodwill of Member States in that area. The political 
commitment of Member States to non-proliferation should be firm and unambiguous. The 
non-proliferation regime could gain ground only if multilateral commitments like the NPT 
were adhered to. 
10. The growing demands which Member States were making on the Agency could only 
be fully met if the Agency had adequate resources. Over the past year, funds had been 
limited and the Director General was to be commended on the imagination he had shown in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 5 

coping with that situation. The Secretariat would be in an even better position to serve 
Member States if the Agency's resource base improved significantly. He therefore urged 
Member States to co-operate among themselves and with the Secretariat to find a solution to 
that problem which took account of the financial situation of all Member States. 

11. In conclusion, on behalf of all the participants, he thanked the Agency's staff who 
continued to serve Member States with devotion, loyalty and enthusiasm, and commended 
the Director General on the leadership he had provided for the organization. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

12. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
13. Mr. BAKSHI (India), speaking on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia 
Group, proposed Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) as President of the thirty-seventh regular 
session of the General Conference. The credentials of Mr. Al-Athel, who was currently the 
President of the King Abdulaziz City for Science and Technology in Saudi Arabia, were 
impeccable and impressive. 
14. Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) was elected President by acclamation. 
15. 
The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, on his own behalf and on behalf of all the 
delegates, congratulated Mr. 
Al-Athel on his election and wished him every success. 
Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) took the Chair. 

16. The PRESIDENT said that he appreciated the honour done to himself and his 
country by his election as President of the thirty-seventh session of the General Conference. 
He promised to work diligently for the success of the Conference, and felt sure that he could 
count on the co-operation of all delegations to that end. He also expressed his gratitude to 
Mr. Adekanye, the outgoing President. 
17. The current session of the General Conference coincided with two historic events. 
A few months previously the nuclear community and the whole world had observed the 
fiftieth anniversary of the first successful test of a nuclear fission chain reaction in the United 
States of America. That test had started a new era, providing a new energy source which 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 6 

could be utilized for the benefit of mankind, but which could at the same time cause the 
extermination of human life and the destruction of the globe. Secondly, the NPT was 
approaching the end of its term and soon the countries of the world would be gathering 
together to review the Treaty and determine its fate. 

18. The NPT was an important international instrument which had stood the test of time. 
The Agency had played an effective role in its success, since it had been entrusted with the 
responsibility of applying the safeguards system provided for by the Treaty. The 
forthcoming NPT Review Conference would provide an opportunity for all peace-loving 
countries to strengthen the Treaty, ensure its continuity and encourage all countries which 
had not yet signed it to do so. 
19. Energy demand throughout the world, and especially in the developing countries, was 
constantly increasing and world energy consumption was expected to double over the coming 
two decades. Much debate had surrounded the various alternative sources of energy, and 
many claims and counter-claims had been made regarding the relative effects on the 
environment, comparative efficiences and the like. Such arguments had hindered the 
optimum development of the alternatives available and their public acceptance. Every energy 
source had its advantages and disadvantages, and a more realistic view should be taken of 
the situation which would encourage efforts to develop all energy sources and make them 
more acceptable to the public. 
20. Nuclear safety was an issue which aroused great public concern, and the Agency had 
made great contributions to that field. Also, the work that some Member States had done 
on the development of a new generation of nuclear power reactors would, it was hoped, lead 
to the production of a reactor that was capable of achieving the desired safety levels. 
21. In conclusion, he looked forward to presiding over a fruitful session which he trusted 
would be marked by a spirit of co-operation. 
22. Turning to the business of election, he recalled that, under Rules 34 and 40 of the 
Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to elect eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole, and five additional members of the General Committee. From the 
consultations which had taken place he understood that there was a consensus on the matter, 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 7 

and he therefore proposed that, under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the delegates of 
Canada, Chile, Ethiopia, the Philippines, Qatar, the Russian Federation, Switzerland and 
Thailand be elected as Vice-Presidents and Mr. Istvan Posta (Hungary) as Chairman of the 
Committee of the Whole; and that, under Rule 40, the delegates of Bulgaria, Colombia, 
France, Nigeria and the United States of America be elected as additional members of the 
General Committee. 

23. Mr. YUN (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that, during its 
consultations, the Far East Group had not in fact reached a consensus on their nominee for 
Vice-President. 
24. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) confirmed that the Far East Group had not been 
able to reach a consensus on their nominee for Vice-President. Two candidates had been put 
forward, the delegate of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the delegate of the 
Philippines. 
25. The PRESIDENT, said that in the circumstances a vote was unavoidable and 
accordingly, under Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the Conference to hold a 
secret ballot. 
26. Mr. YUN (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that he had hoped 
that, in line with previous practice, the President would consult with the members of the 
regional group with a view to achieving a consensus. However, since a secret ballot had 
been requested, his delegation was prepared to stand down, in order to save time. 
27. The PRESIDENT reread the list of nominees for the eight Vice-Presidents, 
the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, and the five additional members of the General 
Committee. 
28. The President's proposals were accepted. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY (GC(XXXVII)/1053, 1054, 
1055, 1056, 1057 and 1083) 

29. The PRESIDENT informed delegates that there were six applications for 
membership before the General Conference which had been submitted by the Slovak Republic 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 8 

(document GC(XXXVII)/1053), the Czech Republic (document GC(XXXVII)/1054), the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands (document GC(XXXVII)/1055), the Republic of Armenia 
(document GC(XXXVII)/1056), the Republic of Kazakhstan (document GC(XXXVII)/1057) 
and the State whose application was the subject of document GC(XXXVII)/1083. In the 
latter case, the Board had recommended that in accordance with the practice adopted by the 
United Nations General Assembly, the State concerned be provisionally referred to for all 
purposes within the Agency as "the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia" pending 
settlement of the difference that had arisen over that State's name. The applications had all 
been endorsed by the Board which had also submitted draft resolutions dealing with each of 
those cases for adoption by the General Conference. 

30. He assumed that the Conference wished to adopt the six draft resolutions in question. 
31. It was so decided. 
32. On behalf of the Conference, he extended a warm welcome to all the six countries 
which had just been approved for membership. 
33. Mr. MISAK (Slovak Republic) expressed his profound gratitude to all those 
present, on behalf of the Slovak Republic, for accepting his country as a Member State of 
the International Atomic Energy Agency. Slovakia would strive to meet fully its obligations 
under the Agency's Statute. 
34. His country was one of the few still expanding their nuclear programmes and nuclear 
energy accounted for approximately 50% of its power generation. Consequently, it attached 
high priority to upgrading the safety of its nuclear power plants. 
35. The Slovak Republic and the Agency had maintained close links despite the former 
losing its membership following the dissolution of the former Czechoslovakia, and his 
country was now willing and able to make an important contribution to the Agency's 
activities by making available its experts and facilities. 
36. Mr. BRATINKA (Czech Republic) thanked all those present on behalf of his 
country for endorsing the Czech Republic's application for membership of the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 9 

37. His Government attached high priority to furthering the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and to that end intended to prepare as soon as possible long overdue legislation to 
regulate its nuclear activities, particularly in nuclear waste management, the back end of the 
nuclear fuel cycle, nuclear damage liability and the associated insurance of nuclear utilities. 
38. The Czech Republic would co-operate fully with the Agency to ensure that its 
regulation of such sensitive areas complied with the highest international standards. 
39. His country intended to give its unreserved support to all the Agency's activities. 
Czech experts would collaborate closely with the Agency's Secretariat, and would receive 
the necessary support from the Czech Government when the Agency so required. As a 
developed nuclear power, the Czech Republic intended to send its experts to developing 
countries and accept trainees from them, organize courses and seminars and participate in 
co-ordinated research programmes. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

40. Mr. PETROVSKY (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) conveyed the Secretary-General's regret at not being able to address the Conference 
personally at an important time for the Agency and for the international community as a 
whole. 
41. As the new challenges of the post-cold-war era began to emerge with greater clarity, 
the time had come to integrate disarmament and non-proliferation into a broader international 
agenda. Both were crucially important objectives in the international peace process but they 
could only be achieved in conjunction with other issues of a political, economic and social 
nature. 
42. The structure of international relations and the nature of international priorities had 
changed dramatically. During the cold war, international relations had been conditioned by 
the political dynamics of superpower competition, in which context States everywhere had 
learned to calculate their interests and seek security. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 10 

43. The end of the cold war had brought new possibilities for co-operation. Political 
understanding, economic co-operation and social dialogue had supplanted geopolitical 
rivalries, bringing concrete and tangible results throughout the world. 
44. However, the end of the cold war had also revealed a dark side. Freed from its 
constraints, long suppressed ethnic, religious and factional rivalries had burst forth into 
violent and open conflict. Ultranationalism and micronationalism were threatening to 
fragment many States. The relatively weak had again become the prey of the relatively 
strong. Unable to sustain cold war expenditures in the absence of cold war subsidies, a 
number of States had simply ceased to function. 
45. In order to address such challenges in the post-cold-war era, a new conceptual 
framework for security was needed. The outlines of such a framework had already begun 
to take shape, based on three essential objectives. First, in order to ensure mankind's 
survival as a species, it was necessary to stop the competition in weapons of mass 
destruction. Second, in order to avoid conflicts based on misconceptions and mistrust, it was 
necessary to promote transparency in armaments and develop other confidence building 
measures. Third, in order to deter potential aggressors it was necessary to exhibit a greater 
collective determination to oppose aggression. 
46. In the context of non-proliferation and disarmament, the end of the cold war had had 
a dramatic effect. A decade previously, military expenditure worldwide had been rising 
dramatically and the nuclear arms race was set to spread into outer space. There had been 
widespread public apprehension and justified alarm over the seemingly relentless build-up in 
both nuclear and conventional military forces. 
47. Much had changed. Impressive cuts had been made in strategic and nuclear arsenals. 
In particular, the signing of the latest Strategic Arms Reduction Treaty (START 2) promised 
a 70% reduction in the global nuclear warhead total over the next decade. The elimination 
of ground-based multiple warhead missiles had substantially defused the nuclear arms race 
by removing the fear of a nuclear first strike. 
48. The 16 bilateral agreements concluded between the United States of America and 
Russia had provided greater transparency and security, and encouraged and facilitated 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 11 

multilateral co-operation on a global scale. Worldwide nuclear testing had declined 
dramatically, and negotiations towards the completion of a nuclear test ban treaty had been 
given a new lease of life. The Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, 
Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction had at long 
last come into effect. A register of conventional arms, designed to increase transparency and 
build confidence, was now in operation. 

49. Such developments had profound implications for the activities of the Agency, 
opening the way for a new level of co-operation. However, new threats and challenges had 
also arisen. 
50. The world remained a dangerous place. As superpower disarmament gathered 
momentum, international concern was focused on ensuring the non-proliferation of nuclear, 
chemical and biological weapons. At a time when substantial disarmament was finally taking 
place, there could be no justification for any State to acquire the tools and technologies of 
mass destruction. 
51. The NPT continued to provide an indispensable framework for the global nuclear 
non-proliferation effort. All 5 nuclear-weapon States were now among the 160 parties to the 
Treaty. 
52. The international community had to be steadfast in ensuring compliance with the 
terms of the NPT. Iraq's secret and extensive efforts to develop nuclear weapons and the 
DPRK's threat to withdraw from the NPT and refusal to comply fully with its obligations 
under the Treaty served as a warning against complacency and highlighted the resolve that 
would be required from the international community to avoid the perils of nuclear 
proliferation. Vigilance, determination and perseverance would continue to be necessary. 
53. It was vital to maintain the credibility of Agency safeguards and ensure full 
implementation of the NPT. The experience of dealing with the challenges posed by Iraq 
and the DPRK demonstrated the importance of strong international backing, including the 
active involvement of the United Nations Security Council when necessary. It was 
imperative to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The consequences of failure 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 12 

would be far reaching with the risk of triggering a chain reaction in the proliferation of 
dangerous weapons of mass destruction. 

54. The recent confrontations in which the Agency had been involved clearly 
demonstrated the need to strengthen the provisions of the NPT. Verification and safeguards 
arrangements needed to be improved. In that context, the Secretary-General fully supported 
the actions taken by the Director General and the Board of the Agency to strengthen 
reporting requirements and conduct special inspections of undeclared facilities in order to 
reinforce the safeguards system. 
55. In order to maintain progress, three outstanding issues needed to be dealt with. First, 
it was vitally important that the NPT be extended indefinitely and unconditionally when it 
was reviewed in 1995. Second, the de facto moratoria on nuclear testing by nuclear-weapon 
States should be maintained and a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty concluded at an 
early date. Third, the momentum gained from the reduction in nuclear arsenals should be 
followed up by efforts to halt completely the production of fissile material for weapons 
purposes. 
56. Traditional concerns over disarmament and non-proliferation rightly remained central 
to the Agency's mission, but increased international attention was also being paid to other 
aspects of the Agency's work such as the safe storage and disposal of fissile materials, 
enhancing the safety of nuclear power plants, and dealing with the consequences of past 
nuclear practices. 
57. Ensuring the safety and security of fissile materials recovered from dismantled 
warheads posed an important challenge to the Agency. International supervision of the 
storage of such materials was an important aspect of confidence building and nuclear 
transparency. It was essential that the newly independent States commit themselves 
immediately to legally binding non-proliferation undertakings, and that full transparency exist 
in the trade and storage of plutonium and highly enriched uranium. 
58. A related concern, that of ensuring the safety of nuclear power plants, had received 
wide international attention over the past year. Countries which operated outdated plants, 
and their neighbours, were anxious to receive advice and support from the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 13 

59. In particular, the need for specific attention to be given to the safe operation of 
Soviet-designed reactors had been widely noted. The nuclear safety convention which would 
hopefully soon be adopted, was designed to serve as the basic international frame of 
reference for safety and review procedures at nuclear power plants. Its implementation 
would be an important step forward. 
60. In pursuance of the relevant General Assembly and ECOSOC resolutions, there had 
been continued close co-operation between the United Nations and the Agency to mitigate 
the consequences of the Chernobyl accident. Further such collaboration was essential in 
order to accurately assess the damage, prevent further harm and alleviate suffering. 
61. Much progress had indeed been achieved. The United Nations Trust Fund for 
Chernobyl had funded the application of an innovative technique developed by the Agency 
and FAO to cut caesium levels substantially in milk and meat. The Agency and UNDP had 
undertaken a joint initiative to strengthen the national institutions responsible for radiation 
protection and nuclear safety in the republics of the former Soviet Union. Furthermore, 
tangible financial support was now available for safety system improvements and for 
combining alternative sources of energy. Such co-operation was essential. It was the duty 
of all concerned to ensure that the world never again had to face the consequences of a 
similar nuclear accident. 
62. The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro 
had underlined the need to husband resources, avoid waste and create safe, abundant and 
sustainable sources of energy, in order to preserve a fragile ecosystem and provide a better 
life for all peoples around the world. 
63. Nuclear science had made valuable contributions to many areas of modern life. 
However, if nuclear power was to be a truly viable global option, the Agency would need 
to help ensure that nuclear energy was produced safely in accordance with the highest 
international standards, that nuclear wastes were disposed of securely and that adequate 
safeguards were deployed to prevent commercial technologies being diverted to military uses. 
64. As the United Nations, like the Agency, prepared to face the difficult challenges that 
lay ahead, the Secretary-General wished the Conference every success in its deliberations. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 14 

65. Speaking on his own behalf as United Nations Under-Secretary General and 
Director-General of the United Nations Office at Geneva, Mr. PETROVSKY said that in his 
recent report, "New Dimensions of Arms Regulation and Disarmament in the Post-Cold-War 
Era", the Secretary-General had advocated the integration of non-proliferation issues into a 
broader international security agenda, globalization of arms control and revitalization of the 
disarmament process. That meant that measures to support the NPT should be combined 
with others aimed at the reduction and limitation of nuclear weapons at both global and 
regional levels. More vigorous efforts would also be needed to strengthen the five other 
main non-proliferation regimes namely, biological weapons, chemical weapons, missile 
technology, export control and conventional weapons. 
66. Globalization with regard to the NPT meant that all States should sign it, while the 
revitalization of the non-proliferation regime implied, inter alia, exploiting the full potential 
of the Treaty. Any problem that Member States might encounter with regard to nuclear 
weapons could and should be solved within the framework of the Treaty, and any violation 
of its provisions should be followed by prompt and severe international sanctions. 
67. The Agency's recent activities, conducted under the able leadership of its Director 
General, had served to demonstrate practically a number of the ideas contained in the 
Secretary-General's report. Firstly, its safeguards system had become one of the undisputed 
pillars of the contemporary international security structure and, secondly, the Agency had 
made itself an undisputed authority in the areas of development of peaceful uses of atomic 
energy, establishment of standards for nuclear safety and environmental protection and 
assistance provided to countries with their atomic energy programmes. 
68. In conclusion, he expressed confidence that the excellent co-operation between the 
United Nations and the Agency would continue to prosper. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

69. Since the thirty-sixth General Conference in September 1992 there had been many 
events and developments which had called for, or would call for, action in the Agency. 
Indeed some had focused world attention on the Agency. South Africa had been the first 
State to abandon its nuclear-weapon status - giving the Agency a number of important 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 15 

verification tasks in the process. Latin America and Africa might soon emerge as nuclearweapon-
free continents. In the Middle East, the peace process seemed to be accelerating, 
inter alia increasing the prospect of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. The nuclear 
disarmament process seemed to be gathering momentum, with possibilities for agreements 
on a complete test ban and a cessation of production of fissionable material for weapons 
purposes, as well as the release of large quantities of nuclear material from dismantled 
nuclear weapons. Such developments would help to create a favourable climate for the 1995 
Conference on the Non-Proliferation Treaty and would also focus attention on the Agency 
as a possible international mechanism for verification. 

70. There were also new problems, such as the dismantling of Iraq's near-nuclear-weapon 
capacity; the presence of nuclear weapons in some of the States of the former Soviet Union; 
and the ambiguous attitude of the Democratic People's Republic of Korea to the NPT and 
to Agency safeguards. 
71. In the field of nuclear power the outlook was extremely diverse. Most western 
industrialized countries were still in recession and that factor, together with significant 
opposition to nuclear power in many western countries, had led to a stagnation in nuclear 
power construction. In contrast, in East Asia, with several booming economies and rapidly 
growing electricity needs, nuclear power was fast expanding. The countries of the former 
Soviet Union and Eastern and Central Europe, facing grim economic realities, remained 
committed to nuclear power while at the same time working hard on upgrading safety. 
72. There was a growing awareness that some of the world's most serious environmental 
threats were linked to the massive and careless use of energy. The present understanding 
that global CO2 emissions would have to be reduced to avoid a greenhouse effect might lead 
to renewed consideration of the CO2-free nuclear power option. The interim should be used 
to enhance nuclear safety, both in reactors and in the handling of nuclear waste. By the time 
the sceptics were prepared to look at the nuclear option again, features which had raised 
doubts earlier should have been dealt with. 
73. For developing countries, many of which did not yet have the capacity to use nuclear 
power, various nuclear techniques in the field of health care, agriculture and industry offered 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 16 

great benefits. Those countries rightly maintained that there should be a balance in the 
Agency between promotional and regulatory activities. In stressing the Agency's promotional 
role they were on firm historical ground. Almost 40 years ago, in a speech before the 
United Nations General Assembly in December 1953, President Eisenhower had proposed 
the creation of the Agency. He had stated: 

"The more important responsibility of this atomic energy agency would be to devise 
methods whereby this fissionable material would be allocated to serve the peaceful 
pursuits of mankind. Experts would be mobilized to apply atomic energy to the needs 
of agriculture, medicine and other peaceful activities. A special purpose would be 
to provide abundant electrical energy in the power-starved areas of the world. Thus 
the contributing Powers would be dedicating some of their strength to serve the needs 
rather than the fears of mankind." 

It was on that lofty mandate that the technology transfer activities of the Agency were 
founded. 

74. The limited but vocal opinion that was so resistant to nuclear energy that it urged the 
Agency to abandon its role in promoting, say, mutation plant breeding, or the use of 
radiation in medicine or in industry, would not meet much understanding among governments 
that continued to share the aims proclaimed by President Eisenhower. 
75. Having briefly outlined the situation, he now wished to make some comments on the 
Agency's work on the transfer of nuclear techniques. 
76. Many nuclear techniques provided highly cost-effective means of solving problems 
in medicine, agriculture and industry. The ability of the Agency to help transfer such 
techniques to developing countries was dependent upon several factors, namely the resources 
contributed, the efficiency of the TC operations and the ability and commitment of the 
recipient countries. Although the main resource base - the Technical Assistance and Co-
operation Fund - had grown steadily, the substantial devaluations which had occurred in nonconvertible 
currencies and pledges below targets by a few industrialized countries had 
regrettably reduced the resources available. 
77. For a long time the RCA - the regional co-operation agreement for Asia - had been 
a very constructive tool in the transfer of nuclear technology to the countries of Asia. 
Similar benefits were being sought through ARCAL (Regional Co-operative Arrangements 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 17 

for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America) and through AFRA 
(African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related 
to Nuclear Science and Technology). In a specialized area such as nuclear techniques, 
positive effects could be gained through regional approaches. However, a strong 
commitment from members of the regions and a steady flow of resources were called for. 
He was glad that a meeting of co-ordinators and managers of the regional programmes would 
take place during the General Conference to discuss common issues and collaboration. 

78. Training played an important part in almost all transfer of nuclear techniques. The 
Agency wished to express its appreciation to the many nuclear institutions and laboratories 
in both industrial and developing countries which received trainees in the most diverse fields. 
He also drew attention to the important training function of the Agency's laboratories in 
Seibersdorf and Monaco. He was glad to note that the Government of Monaco would be 
providing the Marine Environment Laboratory with excellent new premises in 1994. The 
Laboratory, which would then also include a training centre, provided important continuous 
analytical control services for the measurement of nuclear and non-nuclear environmental 
contamination. In recent years it had provided key assistance in the radiological assessment 
of radioactive waste dumping in the Arctic Seas, evaluation of post-war environment 
recovery in the Persian Gulf and a nuclear and conventional pollutant survey in the Danube 
river basin. 
79. A large amount of advanced and highly specialized training in physics had been 
provided through the International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste, for which the 
Agency had had administrative responsibility. With increasing and very generous 
contributions by Italy and the dynamic leadership of Professor Abdus Salam, the Trieste 
Centre had been an intellectual North/South hub of great excellence. As the subjects treated 
had gradually extended far beyond the Agency's domains, it had been agreed that UNESCO 
should take over the day-to-day administrative responsibility. However, the Agency could 
take pride in having helped to create and develop the Centre. The Agency would continue 
to support it financially and to rely on it as an important training institution. 
80. Some new approaches were being followed to increase the effective use of the 
resources available for the Agency's technical assistance. First, the Agency would seek 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 18 

increased assurance that requests for assistance were based on national development 
priorities. That could be done through intensified contacts with the Member States, e.g. 
through pre-project missions. With a firm basis in national priorities the prospect of 
effective implementation would increase. Second, the Agency would verify - at the time of 
project design - that projects were consistent with the policy of sustainable development. In 
fact, surveys of Agency programmes showed that a very high proportion did fulfil that 
criterion. What had been done in the past as a matter of common sense would become 
conscious policy. Third, the Agency would also, in accordance with the statutory 
requirement, require the application of its Basic Safety Standards to all TC projects. Fourth, 
the Agency would develop some practical, end-user oriented projects, which would provide 
the recipients with immediate benefits and might serve as models. Examples of such projects 
included the use of the sterile insect technique in tsetse fly eradication and the use of 
radiation sterilization for a human tissue bank. 

81. Other concrete examples of what the Agency was doing were the following: one 
project had been using Prussian Blue boli very successfully to reduce radio-caesium 
contamination of meat and milk in areas affected by nuclear fallout in Ukraine, Belarus and 
Russia. It had been calculated that the use of $5000 worth of boli had resulted in savings 
of $30 million. The Agency appreciated Norway's funding and technical support for the 
project. 
82. Another project was a joint FAO/IAEA venture to develop and support the use of 
nuclear and molecular-based technologies to diagnose rinderpest - a devastating disease of 
livestock. Under the project the laboratory in Seibersdorf sent diagnostic kits to the affected 
countries in Africa, the Middle East and Asia. The economic benefits of the scheme could 
ultimately be counted in billions of dollars. 
83. Another project planned was for the eradication of the tsetse fly in Zanzibar using 
radiation-sterilized insects. The economic and social development of a large portion of sub-
Saharan Africa was greatly impeded by both human sleeping sickness and African animal 
trypanosomiasis transmitted by tsetse flies. If resources became available, there was an 
opportunity to overcome the scourge on the island of Zanzibar in Tanzania. The project 
would build on the work over a number of years by Agency and FAO experts who had been 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 19 

collaborating with Tanzanian scientists to develop methods for combating the tsetse fly and 
trypanosomiasis. Progress had been so encouraging that the Agency was preparing to launch 
a Model Project for the complete eradication of the tsetse fly from Zanzibar. 

84. In the field of industry, the Agency had helped several States to introduce irradiation 
techniques for sterilizing medical products and to improve products by radiation 
polymerization. 
85. The laboratory in Seibersdorf had assisted laboratories in Africa in using nuclear 
analytical techniques for trace element analysis in air, water, soil and biological samples. 
Those techniques enabled important information to be obtained on thelO 
movement of air pollutants. 

86. In Poland a very successful pilot project was being conducted using ammonium and 
an electron beam to transform into fertilizer the SO2 and NOX contained in the flue gases of 
a coal plant. The upgrading of the technique to industrial scale was now being studied and 
several countries had requested assistance with introducing it. 
87. Lastly, a study had been made and a document prepared on the possibilities of using 
nuclear energy to produce potable water. Several countries had contributed to the work, 
notably the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya which had provided AS 600 000 and two experts. 
88. Coming back to nuclear power, he said that international co-operation in that field 
remained a large and important function of the Agency. Continued and increased reliance 
on nuclear power was a controversial issue in most countries. The Agency - as an 
intergovernmental organization consisting of many States making extensive and increasing 
use of nuclear power and of others which rejected that option - was not seeking to persuade 
Member States collectively or individually to use nuclear power. Decisions in that regard 
were entirely up to the countries themselves. Rather, the work of the organization in that 
area was based on the simple premise that nuclear power was in fact used in many countries, 
that other States were considering introducing it and that there was a need for factual 
information, the exchange of views and experience, the harmonization of standards, and a 
variety of services, especially in the field of nuclear safety. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 20 

89. The Agency compiled and distributed to its Members a great deal of information 
relevant to the nuclear power industry, for example on uranium production, on the 
performance of the world's nuclear power plants, and so forth. For countries considering 
the nuclear power option, the Agency could offer advice and expertise. The recent 
publication "Policy Planning for Nuclear Power" identified some of the issues which such 
countries would need to consider. The Agency also convened technical meetings to discuss 
matters such as the burnup of fuel with a view to achieving optimal fuel economy. It 
provided fora for experts dealing with the design and construction of various new types of 
power reactors. However, most of the work in the sphere of nuclear power was devoted to 
safety and waste handling. He would revert to that later. 
90. The long economic recession that many countries had been experiencing and the 
continuous improvements in energy efficiency tended to make people ignore the fact that the 
use of energy, notably electricity, was expected to grow significantly over the coming 
decades - especially in developing countries but also globally. Since energy production and 
use were one of the principal threats to the environment, it was appropriate that Agenda 21, 
which had been adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development 
in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, had stressed the role of energy in sustainable development and the 
need to design and implement environmentally sound energy strategies. That was going to 
be a difficult task. All energy generation and use carried some degree of risk to health and 
environment. Fossil fuels dominated by far commercial energy sources and it was those 
fuels which gave rise to the most ominous health and environmental effects, for example, 
forests dying from acid rains and global warming, linked inter alia, to carbon dioxide 
emissions. 
91. In its search for agreement to prevent or impede climate change and transfrontier 
pollution, the international community would need the best possible basis in science and data. 
Blind opposition to the use of nuclear power should not be allowed to prevent a factual and 
rational examination and comparison of the data relating to that energy source with those of 
other sources. For several years the Agency has been involved in an inter-agency project 
on databases and methodologies for comparative assessment of different energy sources for 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 21 

electricity generation. The main conclusions and findings should be ready for presentation 
and discussion at a Symposium on Electricity, Health and the Environment in 1995. 

92. While no one, least of all in the Agency, was forgetting the health and environmental 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident, he was convinced that the absence of SO2 and NOX 
and especially CO2 emissions from nuclear power installations, would prove to be of great 
importance. At the present time, some 17% of the world's electricity was generated by 
nuclear power. If expansion of CO2-free energy generation became a vital objective, nuclear 
power could be used not only to increase the production of electricity but also for industrial 
heat, desalination and district heating. Modern windmills and solar cells were welcome 
sources of energy but they were not likely to provide the substantial amounts of power 
needed to meet the growing needs of industrial development in the decades to come. 
93. It was impossible to foretell what conclusions would emerge from the impending 
discussion of energy and environment. What was fortunately clear, however, was that the 
Agency's programme could build on a consensus that, whatever future role were given to 
nuclear power, immediate efforts had to be made to achieve secure global disposal of 
radioactive waste and to increase nuclear safety, especially in those areas where weaknesses 
had been found. 
94. The Agency's activities relating to spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste consisted 
of information exchange, expert assistance, advice and services and elaboration of 
international norms. The organization's work on the marine dumping of radioactive waste 
involved all those activities. Under the London Convention, the Agency provided the 
technical basis for establishing norms relating to disposal of radioactive materials at sea. The 
IAEA Marine Environment Laboratory had supported both the 1992 and the 1993 Kara Sea 
expeditions organized by Russia and Norway. In co-operation with the Governments of those 
two States and as a part of its responsibilities under the London Convention, the Agency had 
initiated the International Arctic Seas Project to assess the possible health and environmental 
impacts of the radioactive wastes dumped in the shallow waters of the Arctic. Samples 
collected in 1992 and analysed at Monaco had shown no evidence of increased activity, but 
a considerable amount of information was needed before a reliable assessment of the potential 
impact of the dumping could be made. The Agency was also exploring ways of assisting in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 22 

examining the dumping of radioactive wastes in the North Pacific, including the Sea of 
Japan, where, fortunately, the quantities dumped appeared to have been much smaller than 
in the Arctic. 

95. Due to the increasing number of reactors in operation around the world, the amount 
of spent fuel to be stored was continuously growing. To disseminate information about new 
technologies and good operating practices in that field, the Agency had initiated an advisory 
programme for the management of irradiated fuel (IFMAP). It was also engaged in the 
preparation of safety guides dealing with the design and operation of spent fuel storage 
facilities, which were expected to be ready for publication in 1994. 
96. The Agency was continuing the programme to develop Radioactive Waste Safety 
Standards - RADWASS. Twelve high-priority documents were being prepared under that 
programme, including the RADWASS Safety Fundamentals, which had been sent to Member 
States for review in July 1993 and could be submitted to the Board of Governors in 1994. 
It was hoped that those documents, when approved, would serve as a basis for a convention 
on the safe management of radioactive wastes - paralleling the convention now being drafted 
on nuclear safety. The voluntary contributions made by the Republic of Korea to those 
activities were of great help. 
97. Much effort had been devoted to nuclear safety in the past year, both nationally and 
internationally. He welcomed among the participants at the General Conference many heads 
of national nuclear safety bodies, who would be meeting with a separate agenda during the 
Conference. It was of great importance that there should be consistency in the safety policies 
applied around the world, and meetings between national regulators promoted such 
consistency. He also welcomed the presence at the meeting of Mr. Remy Carle, Chairman 
of the World Association of Nuclear Operators (WANO), which played an increasingly 
important role in helping nuclear operators to increase safety by learning directly from each 
other. 
98. As in the field of nuclear waste, the Agency's activities in nuclear safety were geared 
both to information collection and analysis, advice and services and the development of 
norms. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 23 

99. For many years the Agency had sought to obtain authoritative and accurate reports 
about serious nuclear events. A case in point had been the accident in April 1993 at the 
Tomsk-7 nuclear centre in Siberia. Less than 24 hours after the Agency had received an 
invitation to be present, three experts had left for Siberia to seek first-hand information about 
the radiological effects of the accident and their consequences for the population and the 
environment. He had cited that case, not to report on the results of the inquiry, which had 
been made available to interested States, but rather to stress the quest for openness and ways 
of increasing safety by learning from significant nuclear events. 
100. Major efforts were being made by authorities and experts in the former Soviet Union 
and in East and Central European countries to upgrade the safety of their nuclear 
installations. Assistance from other countries, from OECD's G-24 Group and from the 
Commission of the European Communities, as well as from WANO, had been and remained 
important. The Agency's activities, which had received considerable financial support from 
Japan, had focused on the implementation of consistent international safety assessments of 
various Soviet-designed nuclear power plants and the elaboration of recommendations for 
upgrading their level of safety. Progress had not always been smooth or rapid in that great 
endeavour, but he believed that all the work had been imbued with a sincere wish to bring 
all the installations concerned - if at all possible - to an acceptable modern safety standard. 
Although the work was still in progress, significant improvements in safety had already been 
made. 
101. One specific area in which the Agency, together with UNDP, had taken an initiative 
was in the strengthening of radiation protection and nuclear safety infrastructures in the States 
of the former Soviet Union, which was of special relevance for safety in research reactors, 
uranium mining and milling and facilities using radiation sources in medicine, agriculture and 
industry. The first phase of the project - an information exchange forum - had been 
successfully undertaken in Vienna from 4 to 7 May 1993. In a second and a third phase, 
assistance packages would be prepared and implemented for individual countries. The Soviet 
Union had possessed an impressive capacity in the field of radiation protection. As that 
centralized system had been broken up, the individual States now needed to acquire their own 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 24 

capacity - individually or, preferably, in co-operation with each other. The project launched 
by the Agency and UNDP sought to assist and facilitate such development. 

102. Referring to work on the international conventions on nuclear safety and liability, he 
said that a consensus on the structure and main contents of the nuclear safety convention had 
emerged in an open-ended working group of legal and technical experts. The Chairman of 
the Group, Mr. Domaratzki, had now prepared a single text as a basis for discussion at the 
next meeting in October 1993. The convention would be limited in its scope to civil nuclear 
power reactors. It would oblige the parties to comply with fundamental safety principles 
developed from the nuclear safety fundamentals approved by the Board in June 1993. An 
important feature would be an obligation of the parties to report at agreed intervals to a 
meeting of contracting parties on the national application of the principles laid down in the 
convention. The reporting would be linked to a system of international peer review. The 
Agency might be asked to assist the parties in the review process and to function as the 
secretariat of the convention. 
103. It was gratifying that the discussions seemed to be heading toward concrete results. 
If progress was maintained, a draft convention might be available to the Board of Governors 
in February 1994, and could be considered and approved by a diplomatic conference to be 
held in conjunction with the General Conference in 1994, or earlier as a separate event. 
104. The Vienna Convention on Nuclear Liability and the Joint Protocol that linked it with 
the Paris Convention were important parts of the international legal infrastructure required 
for the operation and acceptance of nuclear power. In the past year or so, it had become 
clear that accession to the convention by countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet 
Union would remove some obstacles to international co-operation to upgrade nuclear safety 
in those regions. He was glad to report that the negotiation of possible amendments to the 
Vienna Convention had advanced considerably, but mutual concessions were needed to settle 
the issue of supplementary compensation. In the light of the outcome of the consultations 
on the issue, a new target date for a diplomatic conference would be considered in 
October 1993. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 25 

105. The safeguards and verification activities of the Agency had often been at the centre 
of political and media attention in the past year. In the case of Iraq, some 21 inspection 
missions sent by the Agency and considerable staff work in Vienna had made it possible to 
conclude that in all essential aspects the nuclear weapons programme had been fully 
identified, and had been destroyed through the war or neutralized thereafter. The declared 
non-irradiated highly enriched uranium had been removed from Iraq in November 1991 and 
the declared irradiated highly enriched uranium was now scheduled for removal in the 
coming five months. Upon completion of that operation, no highly enriched uranium and 
no capacity to produce it should remain in Iraq. There were still some disturbing gaps in the 
Agency's knowledge about the nuclear supply and procurement channels of Iraq and about 
its sources of scientific and technical information. 
106. It was hoped that those last pieces of the picture would soon be clarified by the Iraqi 
side, which was anxious that the Agency and UNSCOM should conclude that Iraq had 
complied with the requirements of United Nations Security Council resolution 687. The 
Agency had already phased in some of the elements required for long-term monitoring in 
Iraq, including arrangements for environmental sampling. In recent discussions in New York 
with the Iraqi side, the Agency and UNSCOM had clarified how ongoing monitoring and 
verification would be pursued. Such monitoring would not, of course, preclude the Agency 
from utilizing, if necessary, the extensive rights of inspection laid down in the plan approved 
by the Security Council. 
107. He wished to make two points regarding the Agency's work in Iraq: first, the 
extensive work of inspection and analysis of the Iraqi nuclear programme had been 
performed by an Action Team that had never comprised more than five full-time 
Professionals and two very capable secretaries in Vienna. For the inspections and much of 
the analysis, the Agency had been able to draw on the resources of its Safeguards 
Department, the Seibersdorf Laboratories and a chain of support laboratories in Member 
States. For some types of inspection expertise, it had obtained specialized personnel from 
Member States. As international organizations were often criticized for lack of effectiveness 
and efficiency, he thought that both the fulfilment of the Agency's mandate in Iraq and the 
cost-effective manner in which it had been carried out should be noted. Second, the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 26 

operations in Iraq had given the Agency vast experience with new techniques which could 
be of great value as it worked to strengthen the capability of the safeguards system to detect 
undeclared material and installations. 

108. The revelations in Iraq had highlighted the fact that normal safeguards inspections 
were focused on declared nuclear material and declared installations, and had led to efforts 
to strengthen the Agency's capability to discover material and installations which should have 
been declared but had not been. The discovery of a non-declared nuclear programme in a 
country having comprehensive safeguards had also led the Secretariat to add further precision 
to certain important conclusions it had drawn from its safeguards activities. Thus, the 
Safeguards Implementation Report for 1992 (GOV/2653) contained the following 
formulation: 
"On the basis of all the information available to the Agency, it is considered 
reasonable to conclude that nuclear material and other items which had been placed 
under Agency safeguards remained in peaceful nuclear activities or were otherwise 
adequately accounted for." 

109. That statement was deliberately limited to declared nuclear material and other items. 
Even so, it was qualified by a footnote to the effect that the safeguards system was not so 
fine-meshed that it was likely to detect diversions of less than a significant quantity. Those 
circumspect formulations might appear pedantic, but it was important that the Agency should 
not offer more reassurance than could in practice be obtained from the safeguards system. 
However desirable it would be to have a clear affirmation that no non-declared nuclear 
installations existed in a country with comprehensive safeguards, such categorical 
formulations could not be made on the basis of the results of the Agency's verification 
activities. All that could be done was to report on the results of the inspection and analysis 
effort to verify the correctness and assess the completeness of State declarations, to point to 
evidence which supported or undermined the veracity of the declarations and to note the 
presence or the absence of any evidence casting doubt on the credibility of the declarations. 
Even in the case of Iraq, where the Agency had had exceptional means of investigation and 
rights of access, the task of assessing the absence of further non-declared nuclear items was 
difficult. Where the Agency operated under normal NPT-type safeguards rights, the task of 
assessing the completeness of a declaration was still more difficult. The transparency of the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 27 

nuclear programme and the co-operation offered were decisive factors in the fulfilment of 
that task. Current discussions on increasing the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards 
system centred around those factors. 

110. Since the conclusion, in September 1991, of the safeguards agreement between South 
Africa and the Agency pursuant to the NPT, the Agency had been engaged in activities to 
implement the agreement and verify the completeness and assess the correctness of South 
Africa's initial report. As could be seen from the report in document GC(XXXVII)/1075, 
no less than twenty-two missions had been carried out in South Africa over the past two 
years. It was only fair to report that the Agency had encountered a highly co-operative 
attitude on the part of the South African authorities. With time, effort and co-operation, its 
inspectors had been able to resolve many apparent discrepancies and inconsistencies which 
they had identified. As stated in the report, the apparent discrepancies relating to low 
enriched uranium - which had been accorded lower priority - remained to be clarified and 
would call for continued efforts. No evidence had been found casting doubt on the veracity 
of the initial declaration. 
111. A new dimension had been added to the Agency's work in South Africa when, in 
March 1993, President de Klerk had declared that South Africa had developed a nuclear 
weapons capability, that the weapons had been dismantled and destroyed before South Africa 
had joined the NPT and that figures referring to the resulting quantity of recovered highly 
enriched uranium had been included in the initial report submitted to the Agency. The 
Agency had been invited by South Africa to examine all the facilities that had been involved 
in South Africa's nuclear weapons programme, to inspect all remaining records, to observe 
that the programme had, in fact, been terminated and to gain assurance that all the nuclear 
material involved had been placed under safeguards. A team of senior Agency staff and 
nuclear weapon experts had visited South Africa in April, June and August 1993 for those 
purposes. Their report was to be found in GC(XXXVII)/1075. The team had seen 
substantial evidence of the destruction of equipment used in the development and making of 
the nuclear weapons and of the termination of the programme. It had found no indications 
to contradict South Africa's statement that all the highly enriched uranium from weapons had 
been reported in the initial declaration. Nevertheless, the Agency planned to utilize the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 28 

standing invitation of the South African Government - under its reiterated policy of 
transparency - to provide the Agency with full access to any location or facility associated 
with the former nuclear weapons programme, in order to satisfy itself on a continuing basis 
that such facilities were now dedicated to commercial non-nuclear usage or to peaceful 
nuclear usage, and to request access, on a case-by-case basis, to other locations or facilities 
that the Agency might wish to visit. 

112. As regarded the DPRK, he did not propose to give a chronological report on 
safeguards in that country since the 1992 session of the General Conference, since a fairly 
detailed paper was available in document GC(XXXVII)/1084. The most important problem 
encountered was that the Agency's analysis of samples obtained from the DPRK suggested 
that some nuclear material existed that had not been included in the initial report. 
Consequently, the Agency was not in a position to verify the correctness and assess the 
completeness of that report. The Agency had not asserted that the DPRK was diverting 
nuclear material for weapons development, but so long as the inconsistency between the 
report of the DPRK and the Agency's findings was not resolved by credible explanations 
through additional information and visits to additional locations, the Agency could not 
exclude that the nuclear material had been diverted. 
113. A Government which stated that it was committed to non-proliferation and was faced 
with questions from the Agency about the completeness of its declaration should have strong 
reasons to show maximum openness, in order to clarify the matter as speedily as possible. 
He regretted that the initial policy of the DPRK of allowing Agency officials to visit any 
place at any time had not been maintained and the Agency had finally been constrained to 
ask formally for additional information and for special inspection of two sites which it had 
reason to believe were related to nuclear waste and might shed some light on the 
inconsistencies found. 
114. Full nuclear transparency was a means of creating confidence, and comprehensive 
Agency safeguards were a mechanism to create that transparency. Without a State's effective 
co-operation in fully implementing its obligations under a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement, the results of the verification activities would be inadequate, and they could not 
create confidence. That was the background to the resolutions of the Agency's Board of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 29 

Governors and of the Security Council urging the DPRK to co-operate fully with the Agency. 
Regrettably, the readiness of the DPRK to implement the safeguards agreement appeared to 
have diminished rather than grown. While in April the Agency had been assured there had 
never been any obstacle to ad hoc and routine inspections, such inspections had now been 
declined, and the DPRK expressed only readiness to accept limited safeguards activities, 
mainly for maintenance. The area of non-compliance with the comprehensive safeguards 
agreement was thus widening. 

115. There had been earlier uncertainty regarding the possible existence of non-declared 
nuclear material. If effective inspection of declared nuclear material and installations could 
not be performed, no further assurance could be given about their exclusively peaceful use. 
Only the implementation of systematic, effective and timely safeguards could give such 
assurance. Whenever the DPRK was ready to accept such inspection, the Agency was ready 
to provide it. It was also ready at any time to consult with the DPRK about ways to resolve 
the inconsistencies which had been found. 
116. The DPRK had resented the insistence with which the Agency was seeking 
explanations for the inconsistencies it had found and was suggesting merely token safeguards 
measures. On reflection, most would agree that all countries, including the DPRK, needed 
to be sure that the Agency would display all the diligence required of it under the safeguards 
agreements in order to fully implement those agreements, and that the Agency would pursue 
any discrepancies or inconsistencies it might find. Confidence in the Agency and its 
safeguards verification required that it live up to that demand. 
117. Turning to efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of the safeguards system while 
keeping costs low, he remarked that there was sometimes a tendency in public debate to 
expect from safeguards more than they could conceivably achieve. The development of the 
safeguards system over the last few decades was a valuable contribution to arms control 
efforts, and the system was potentially of important use beyond its present applications. It 
was necessary, however, to appreciate what it could and could not do. 
118. Safeguards inspectors were not supranational police who could parachute in anywhere 
to stop violations of non-proliferation commitments. They were not an executive force but 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 30 

inspectors who reported observations which, if they were reassuring, might create confidence 
and detente, and if they were alarming, might trigger action - in the last resort by the 
Security Council and its members. Inspection was accepted by States only on the basis of 
explicit safeguards agreements which were entered into voluntarily. The present model rules 
embodied in INFCIRC/153 and 66 reflected a balance between the interest that States had 
collectively in credible inspection, and the interests they had individually in not being 
subjected to excessively intrusive or cumbersome international control. While such a balance 
would always be required - and was indeed to be found also in the recent chemical weapons 
convention - there was room for measures which would strengthen the effectiveness of the 
present safeguards system, and the Agency was seeking to introduce such measures. 

119. In the past few years the Board had repeatedly examined different ways of improving 
the effectiveness of safeguards while keeping the costs low. Much had been attained, but 
considerable challenges lay ahead. Action had been taken inter alia to allow the Agency to 
receive design information concerning nuclear installations earlier than previously. States 
might also supply information on the export and import and production of nuclear material 
and relevant equipment. The Secretariat would seek to extract more pertinent information 
from data already available to it and would look to other sources, like public media, for 
relevant facts. While, in his view, the Secretariat should be keen to obtain all safeguardsrelevant 
information, it would have to subject that information to critical analysis to avoid 
relying on erroneous data or disinformation. 
120. As it was very much in the interest of Member States that the safeguards system 
should be strengthened, notably in order to give greater assurance against the existence of 
nuclear installations which should have been declared but had not been, he hoped that 
Member States would give positive effect to the actions of the Board, for instance by 
agreeing to modifications in subsidiary arrangements and by providing safeguards-relevant 
information. 
121. In parallel with efforts to make the safeguards system more effective, efforts were 
continuing to deploy resources in such a way as to ensure that increases in the number of 
nuclear installations and amounts of nuclear material to be safeguarded did not lead to cost 
increases. Over the eight-year period of zero-real-growth budgets, the cost of safeguarding 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 31 

nuclear material per significant quantity had been halved. The agreement reached in 1992 
with the European Community on partnership in the performance of safeguards in the 
Community had meant a very significant saving of resources precisely at the time when they 
were acutely needed, namely for safeguards in South Africa and the DPRK. 

122. He hoped that current discussions in the Secretariat and in the Standing Advisory 
Group on Safeguards Implementation on alternative safeguards approaches might lead 
eventually to both cost savings and greater confidence about the absence of undeclared 
nuclear facilities and activities in States with comprehensive safeguards agreements. It was 
clear that several of those cost-saving approaches would require a greater measure of 
transparency and co-operation by Member States. Several new methods and approaches, 
including environmental monitoring, also needed to be thoroughly tested and assessed before 
they could be generally used. A few States had offered to test environmental monitoring and 
various methods to increase nuclear transparency. That was valuable. Indeed, it would be 
useful if a small but representative group of both industrialized and developing countries 
were to take part in the testing of the new approaches and methods. He invited further States 
to join in those efforts. 
123. A very important development had started several years ago when Argentina and 
Brazil had decided to embark on extensive bilateral nuclear co-operation. The dividends that 
could be expected from such co-operation were not only in the area of economics and 
scientific and technical development but also in mutual confidence. With the bilateral 
openness broadening to an international transparency through acceptance of comprehensive 
Agency safeguards, the path had been opened to ratification of the Tlatelolco Treaty, as 
recently amended. If, as seemed likely, Cuba were to join the Tlatelolco Treaty, that Treaty 
would enter fully into force, and Latin America would have formally and legally renounced 
nuclear weapons and nuclear explosives. 
124. An important milestone had been the signing in Vienna in December 1991 of a 
quadripartite safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine 
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) and the Agency. The 
Argentine Parliament had approved the agreement the previous year, and he was pleased to 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 32 

note that the lower house of the Brazilian Congress had approved it the previous week, 
together with the amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty. 

125. Since then discussions had taken place among the four parties about the 
implementation approach, including the verification of the Initial Report, and about the 
subsidiary arrangements. The co-operation with Argentina, Brazil and ABACC had been 
intensive and fruitful, with visits to the Agency and seminars and training of operators and 
inspection staff. He himself and the Deputy Director General for Safeguards, Mr. Pellaud, 
had visited Brasilia and Rio de Janeiro in August to discuss principal points in the future 
safeguards arrangements with Ministers and with the Argentine-Brazilian leadership of 
ABACC. A strong and effective ABACC would facilitate the Agency's task of performing 
comprehensive safeguards and reaching independent conclusions. Even so, the safeguarding 
of the broad and advanced nuclear programmes of those two large States would place added 
demands on Agency resources. He had assured the representatives of the two countries that, 
far from hampering nuclear scientific and technical development, comprehensive Agency 
safeguards were likely to facilitate such development by removing certain obstacles to 
international co-operation. Extensive talks had taken place in Rio de Janeiro recently on the 
subsidiary arrangements to the quadripartite agreement, and he was glad to say that not many 
points remained to be resolved. 
126. In anticipation of their accession to the NPT, a great deal of preparatory work had 
been undertaken for the introduction of comprehensive safeguards in States of the former 
Soviet Union. It was of great importance that effective national systems of nuclear 
accountancy and control, compatible with the Agency's safeguards system, be established. 
Both individual Member States and the Secretariat had helped by providing information and 
equipment and by organizing seminars on those matters. A co-ordinated support programme 
for the newly independent States with substantial nuclear programmes was currently being 
developed, with Agency participation. 
127. Fact-finding missions and technical visits had allowed Agency staff to familiarize 
themselves with the nuclear installations which were expected to come under safeguards. 
Actual implementation of safeguards, however, would need to await the conclusion of formal 
safeguards agreements. To date only one such agreement had come into force - with 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 33 

Lithuania. Clearly the introduction of comprehensive safeguards in those countries would 
generate a considerable amount of additional work for the Agency. 

128. He would now deal with potential uses of Agency experience and resources in the 
verification of the peaceful use of nuclear material and installations, and first of all the 
question of safeguards in the Middle East. 
129. There was no way of knowing when the parties to the present peace negotiations in 
the Middle East would be able to agree on the establishment of the hoped-for nuclearweapon-
free zone. There was, however, keen interest in the region in examining appropriate 
modalities of applying safeguards verification in such a zone, and he had been charged under 
GC(XXXVI)/RES/601 to continue consultations to facilitate the early application of full-scope 
Agency safeguards to all nuclear activities in the region. 
130. As would be seen from the Report he had submitted (GC(XXXVII)/1072), he had 
continued consultations with States in the region during the past year by requesting their 
written comments and by personally visiting some States, namely Israel, Jordan and Saudi 
Arabia. 
131. With a view to familiarizing relevant experts from the Middle East with the many 
aspects of effective verification of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, the Agency had also arranged 
a workshop in May on "The Modalities for the Application of Safeguards in a Future 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone in the Middle East". The lectures given in that workshop had 
now been published in compendium form to enable them to reach a broader audience. 
132. As he had stated in the report, it was clear that the long-standing tension between 
parties in the region could be dissipated only through the combined effects of many different 
types of measures, including political and military confidence-building. The nuclear activities 
of each party would be the subject of interest of all parties, and the climate of confidence 
would be affected by the way in which those activities were pursued and verified. Legally 
binding commitments by every party for the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction, 
and for the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy, would be vital elements. In addition, 
ways had to be found of creating reasonable guarantees for reliance on such commitments, 
and for the early discovery of departures from them, should such occur. That was where an 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 34 

effective verification system came in. It should also not be overlooked that some joint 
experience - notably among European countries and between Argentina and Brazil - pointed 
to the usefulness of active co-operation between parties in the nuclear field in creating 
confidence through both openness and interdependence. 

133. Recent developments in the peace process in the Middle East offered hope that the 
positive attitude among all the parties in the Middle East to a nuclear-weapon-free zone could 
be translated by them in due course into an agreement. The Agency remained ready to 
provide whatever assistance might be deemed useful by the parties in the Middle East to 
facilitate implementation of the resolution adopted by the General Conference. The 
Secretary-General of the United Nations had recently stressed the importance of assistance 
provided by the United Nations system in connection with the accord between Israel and the 
Palestine Liberation Organization. Regional co-operation projects involving nuclear 
techniques might be a useful instrument for confidence-building. 
134. Article XII.A.5 of the Agency's Statute contained provisions governing the deposit 
with the Agency of any excess of any special fissionable materials. It was evident that the 
current process of nuclear disarmament in the United States and the Russian Federation, as 
well as the ongoing reprocessing of spent civilian nuclear fuel, would lead to substantial 
quantities of plutonium and highly enriched uranium, which would have to be stored before 
they were used or otherwise disposed of. There was a clear international interest that such 
storage should take place under conditions of adequate physical security, nuclear safety andnot 
least - under conditions which provided a very high degree of assurance that the 
fissionable material would not be diverted, or - in the case of material recovered from the 
military sector - returned to use in weapons or explosives. 
135. An agreement on an international regime for the management of plutonium and highly 
enriched uranium might be a means of achieving that objective. The Secretariat had 
undertaken some work to prepare for discussion of those issues, should any member 
governments wish to examine the advantages, problems and modalities involved. Clearly, 
the safeguards experience of the Agency would be a major element in such a regime, but 
how heavy a burden it would place on the Agency would of course depend on the modalities 
of the regime, and the quantities of fissionable material States would want to place under it. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 35 

136. A verified termination of production of plutonium and highly enriched uranium for 
weapons or other explosive purposes had been under international discussion for many years, 
and in the present international climate that discussion could lead to concrete proposals for 
an agreement involving all States on an equal basis. The premise would be that there was 
already more than enough weapons-usable material and no need for further production of 
such material. Methods and techniques of verification existed, but might need to be further 
developed. It had to be realized, however, that should Agency safeguards be applied to the 
operation or dismantling of all installations capable of such production, the added workload 
of verification would be large. It would probably have to be assumed in stages and would 
require adequate funding. 
137. Among the arms control measures now subject to international discussion was an 
agreement on a complete ban on the testing of nuclear weapons and other explosives, and it 
had been suggested that the Agency might be given a central role in the verification of such 
an agreement. Some old and some new techniques for safeguards verification, for example 
environmental sampling, might indeed be valuable in the verification of a complete test ban. 
Although the Agency had not had an international role in the central verification method 
discussed for a complete test ban, that of seismic measurements, it did have some experience 
and expertise in that area. With some added capacity, it could probably undertake the task 
of compiling and co-ordinating information provided by national institutions about 
seismological measurements - the so-called clearing-house function. 
138. The Agency had been called upon to participate in the preparation of the 1995 NPT 
Conference, which was to review the operation of the Treaty and decide on its extension, and 
would prepare the customary reports on its own role in the implementation of some of the 
articles of the Treaty. There was little doubt, however, that the most important contributions 
which the Agency could make to that Treaty were the increasing of the effectiveness and 
credibility of safeguards applied under the Treaty, the extending of safeguards to the new 
parties to the Treaty and the continued promotion of nuclear technology transfer for peaceful 
purposes. 
139. He wished to conclude with a few brief comments on matters relating to the Agency's 
finances, budget, programme and personnel. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 36 

140. The financial situation of the Agency remained precarious. It had avoided crises only 
because the substantial shortfalls in budgetary contributions to its activities had been met by 
curtailment or deferment of activities, amounting to a 12% cut in expenditure in 1993. 
Although the size of the present shortfall was mainly attributable to the arrears of a single 
major contributor, he felt bound to say that a virtually across-the-board improvement of 
discipline was needed to pay, to pay fully and to pay on time. 
141. The budget for 1994 marked almost a decade of zero real growth. While it was 
evident that important demands representing priorities for one group or another had not been 
responded to, the Agency could take pride in the fact that so many new needs of governments 
for international action in the nuclear field had been met in its programme. Member States 
should also be aware that some vital activities were financed not through the Regular Budget, 
where they should properly be accommodated, but through voluntary extrabudgetary 
contributions. 
142. When resources were so scarce it became particularly important that they be used to 
satisfy the interests of different groups of Member States in an equitable manner. 
Resolutions 587 and 596 of the 1992 General Conference were a reminder of that. The 
lengthy process in which the programme and budget were thrashed out between Member 
States and the Secretariat provided the best means of securing a balance acceptable to all. 
The Secretariat, for its part, was committed to drafting and implementing a programme 
designed to satisfy the priority interests of all groups. 
143. Skill in perceiving and identifying the needs of different Member States, innovation 
in devising means of responding to those needs, and effectiveness in action could only be 
achieved if the organization was staffed by broadly-recruited and highly-competent 
professionals and a dedicated general service staff. Not all Groups and Member States would 
be happy with every recruitment decision, and there were still some underrepresented States 
and Groups. However, he could assure the Conference that he would do his best to maintain 
both the highest level of professional competence and a broad geographical basis for 
recruitment. The success of that effort had to be judged over a period of time, and had 
above all to be gauged by the quality of service that the Secretariat provided to the 
organization. In that regard he had every confidence. By financial necessity the Agency was 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 37 

understaffed, but it was well staffed in terms of quality to meet the many challenges facing 
it, and to perform the tasks which Member Governments might wish to place before it. 

144. Finally, he wished to express his thanks to the Government of Austria and the City 
of Vienna for their hospitality. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1994 

145. The PRESIDENT said that the Agency's Policy-making Organs had, 
since 1982, followed the practice of recommending indicative planning figures for use in 
establishing annual targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF. In June 1992 the Board 
had reached agreement on increases in the targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF 
from the 1992 level of US $52.5 million to $55.5 million in 1993, $58.5 million in 1994 and 
$61.5 million in 1995. Accordingly, in the draft resolution relating to the TACF - contained 
in Annex IV to document GC(XXXVII)/1062 - the Board recommended the figure of 
$58.5 million as the target for voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1994. 
146. Early pledging of voluntary contributions was of considerable help to the Secretariat 
in planning technical assistance programmes. He therefore urged all delegations that were 
in a position to do so, but had not done so as yet, to notify the Secretariat during the current 
session of the voluntary contributions which their Governments would be making to the 
TACF in 1994. 
147. He would report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, on the voluntary 
contributions which had been pledged up to that time, and was confident that he would then 
be in a position to report favourably on the percentage of the 1994 target figure already 
pledged. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 

148. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) congratulated the Director General on his 
reappointment and welcomed the admission of the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, the 
Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Republic of Armenia, the Republic of Kazakhstan and 
the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia to the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 38 

149. He commended the Secretariat on its important achievements in the promotion of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Given the limitations of the use of fossil fuel and the tardy 
development of alternative energy technologies, nuclear power had emerged as the best 
available option for large-scale energy generation. While there was increasing acceptance 
of nuclear energy as the only viable energy source at present, concern was growing in the 
international community about the potential misuse of nuclear technology and materials as 
well as the safety of nuclear power reactors. The Republic of Korea appreciated the 
important role entrusted to the Agency in that sphere by the international community. 
150. He reiterated his Government's full support for the Agency's safeguards activities and 
expressed appreciation for the efforts being made to strengthen the safeguards system and 
enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards. The Republic of Korea welcomed 
the initiatives taken by the Director General to examine alternative safeguards approaches 
through S AGSI and looked forward to his recommendations concerning the development and 
implementation of new procedures such as environmental monitoring for more efficient 
detection of undeclared nuclear facilities and activities. 
151. His Government had also noted with great interest the endorsement by the Board of 
Governors in February of the establishment of a reporting scheme for nuclear material and 
specified equipment and non-nuclear material as a means of strengthening the Agency's 
safeguards system. He expressed deep concern about the security of surplus plutonium and 
high enriched uranium resulting from the dismantling of nuclear warheads and from 
commercial reprocessing activities. At the previous session of the General Conference his 
delegation had suggested that the Agency play a more active role in the field of international 
storage and management of such sensitive surplus fissionable materials. Following the 
suggestion made by the Director General in his opening statement, he invited other Member 
States to consider starting consultations on the issue on the basis of preparatory work 
undertaken by the Secretariat. 
152. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that the horrific Chernobyl accident remained fresh 
in the minds of many people. That experience had unfortunately intensified the international 
community's fears about the use of nuclear technology. On the other hand, it had also 
strengthened the common resolve to improve safety procedures in nuclear operations and had 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 39 

drawn attention to the need for international co-operation on nuclear safety. He noted with 
satisfaction the Agency's implementation of nuclear safety projects in Eastern Europe. His 
country was ready to support the Agency in those efforts, particularly in providing technical 
experts. 

153. The Republic of Korea had taken great interest in the discussion at the Board of 
Governors meeting the previous week concerning the drawing up of safety principles for 
future nuclear power plants, since it was currently developing safety principles and technical 
guidelines for the development of the next generation nuclear power reactor. His delegation 
also looked forward to adoption of a nuclear safety convention at a diplomatic conference the 
following year and hoped that it would play an important role in intensifying co-operation 
in the field of nuclear safety. 
154. His Government had taken note of the measures taken by the Agency relating to the 
dumping of radioactive materials at sea by the former Soviet Union. It proposed that the 
Agency also provide technical assistance in dealing with waste dumping in the "East Sea" 
(Sea of Japan) to the countries concerned. It welcomed the RADWASS programme 
established by the Agency to provide Member States with criteria for the safe management 
of radioactive waste. The special contribution that the Republic of Korea had made to the 
project reflected the high priority it attached to effective nuclear waste management at an 
international level. He urged Member States to support the RADWASS programme. 
155. The Republic of Korea appreciated the Agency's sustained effort for the RCA 
programme in the Asia and Pacific region. Implementation of phase three of the 
UNDP/RCA project was expected to accelerate co-operation among countries in the region. 
His Government remained committed to its proposal the previous year that a regional cooperation 
mechanism be established among the countries of North East Asia to promote a 
joint effort on nuclear safety. 
156. He restated his Government's view that the Agency's Statute, which had last been 
revised in 1973, was due for overhaul. The time had come for the Agency to seek ways of 
restructuring its main policy-making organ to reflect fully the post-cold war situation and the 
state of development of nuclear technology, as well as to ensure greater functional 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 40 

effectiveness. The Republic of Korea urged Member States and the Secretariat to pursue 
consultations on that important issue more vigorously in the months to come. 

157. He reiterated his Government's unequivocal commitment to denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula. Non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and complete nuclear transparency 
were essential to ensure peace and security on the Korean Peninsula and in the world as a 
whole. His Government was gravely concerned about the recent worsening of the situation 
with respect to the DPRK's suspected nuclear programme. Inconsistencies between the 
DPRK's declaration on nuclear material and the Agency's findings remained unresolved 
because the DPRK had refused to provide access to additional information and to two sites, 
as requested by the Agency's Board of Governors and the United Nations Security Council. 
DPRK non-compliance with its comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency was 
now becoming even wider with its refusal to allow normal ad hoc and routine inspections of 
declared nuclear facilities. 
158. The world community was greatly alarmed by the DPRK's serious challenge to the 
authority and integrity of the Agency. If nothing was done, the international nonproliferation 
regime and the safeguards system would be seriously undermined, posing a 
serious threat to world peace and security. His Government therefore called on the General 
Conference to deal with the issue, as recommended by the Board of Governors, and 
pronounce its fiim and unequivocal stand in favour of prompt and full implementation of its 
safeguards agreement and of the associated Board and Security Council resolutions by the 
DPRK. Early and full implementation of the South-North Joint Declaration on the 
Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was also essential in order to build mutual 
confidence and ensure transparency. It was the Republic of Korea's earnest hope that the 
South-North dialogue would be resumed as soon as possible, so that an agreement could be 
reached on a mutual inspection regime. 
159. Mr. EDA (Japan) said that his country's recently installed coalition 
government should be seen as marking a new point of departure for Japan, which was 
determined to assume responsibilities in the international community commensurate with its 
status. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 41 

160. As the only country in the world ever to have experienced the devastation of an 
atomic bomb, Japan fervently hoped that such a tragedy would never be repeated. In that 
regard, he felt that respect was due to the authors of Japan's Atomic Energy Basic Law of 
1955, which stipulated that the research, development and utilization of atomic energy should 
be limited to peaceful purposes, aimed at ensuring safety and performed independently under 
democratic management, and that the results thereof should be made public in the interests 
of international co-operation. The new Government under Prime Minister Hosokawa had 
undertaken to follow the previous administration's main policies on nuclear power and the 
Atomic Energy Commission, of which he (Mr. Eda) was Chairman, would continue to abide 
by the principles of the aforementioned law. 
161. Nuclear energy provided Japan with an indispensable source of base-load energy and 
supplied almost 30 per cent of its needs. Japan would be maintaining its nuclear energy 
option on the basis of strict safety standards. In that context, the plutonium issue was 
unavoidable, since nuclear fuel recycling to facilitate plutonium utilization was vital both for 
countries like Japan with meagre energy resources and for long-term global energy security. 
His country had therefore been promoting the programme to construct nuclear fuel cycle 
facilities at Rokkasho-mura. In that connection, he wished to express Japan's gratitude to 
the governments concerned for their understanding and co-operation regarding its recent 
plutonium shipment. 
162. In co-operation with other leading nuclear powers, Japan had been steadily promoting 
fast breeder reactor development with a view to ensuring proper plutonium utilization and 
improving the efficiency of uranium utilization. The Monju reactor was due to reach 
criticality in spring the following year and would provide a focus for wide-ranging 
international research. In addition, the Atomic Energy Commission was currently reviewing 
Japan's long-term programme for the development and utilization of nuclear energy, which 
would be guided by the policy of developing plutonium utilization within the constraints 
imposed by the most exacting safety standards. 
163. The Agency's timely activities in the past year in the sphere of safety were to be 
commended, since the improvement of nuclear safety through global co-operation, together 
with the fostering of each country's nuclear safety culture, deserved the highest priority. In 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 42 

that context, he called for the early completion of the drafting of a nuclear safety convention, 
urged the Agency to continue to concern itself with Russia's ocean dumping of radioactive 
waste and expressed his country's readiness to support the Agency's efforts to ensure that 
swift, effective action was taken to improve the safety of nuclear power plants in the former 
Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe. 

164. His country also highly commended the Agency's safeguards programme. In that 
context Japan strongly urged the DPRK to retract its decision to withdraw from the NPT and 
to fulfil its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency and the Joint 
Declaration on Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. It fully supported the Agency's 
efforts to that end. With its 158 signatories, including all nuclear-weapon States, the NPT 
was beginning to achieve the universality so important for global disarmament, peace and 
security. The NPT also provided the best guarantee that its Parties would be able to enjoy 
the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
165. His country welcomed negotiations at the disarmament conference in Geneva aimed 
at elaborating a multilateral comprehensive test ban treaty (CTBT), which would serve the 
cause of non-proliferation. It was Japan's earnest hope that Ukraine and Kazakhstan, 
together with other (non-nuclear-weapon) States not yet party to the NPT, would accede to 
it at an early date. 
166. With regard to the dismantling of nuclear arsenals in the former Soviet Union, it was 
vital to ensure that the utilization for energy purposes of nuclear materials derived from 
warheads should exclude any risk of their diversion or that of the technologies involved. At 
the G-7 Joint Ministerial Meeting in April Japan had declared its intention to allocate 
approximately $100 million to support denuclearization in the former Soviet Union as a part 
of a new aid package for the Russian Federation. Japan was very interested in the idea of 
an international regime for the management of plutonium and highly enriched uranium 
derived from the dismantling of nuclear warheads and of plutonium originally separated for 
peaceful purposes, and was currently exploring a proposal in that regard. It hoped to pursue 
that matter with interested countries and with the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.353 
page 43 

167. Despite the Agency's growing importance in the areas of non-proliferation, nuclear 
technology and nuclear safety, it was facing serious financial difficulties which were forcing 
it to sacrifice some activities for the sake of others and juggle with its resources. It was to 
be hoped that, like Japan, the Agency's other Member States would do their utmost to 
respond to requests for funds and so assist the Agency in its vital role of helping to create 
a new order for world peace. Japan was determined to play an ever more positive part in 
achieving that goal. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
24 November 1993 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 
Original: FRENCH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Monday, 27 September 1993, at 3.50 p.m. 
President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
Later: Mr. KIENER (Switzerland) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 

General debate and annual report for 1992 
(continued) 1 - 120 

Statements by the delegates of: 

China 1 - 13 
United States of America 14-35 
Saudi Arabia 36-48 
Venezuela 49-55 
Tunisia 56-66 
Cuba 67-80 
Islamic Republic of Iran 81 - 105 
Sweden 106 - 120 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-3741 (IV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 2 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASSET 

DPRK 

EBRD 

IPERS 

NPT 

OSART 

SAGSI 

TACF 

Tlatelolco Treaty 

Abbreviations used in this record 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
International Peer Review Service 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (continued) 

1. Mr. JIANG (China), having warmly welcomed the admission of six new 
Member States to the Agency, said that in recent years numerous Member States, under the 
Agency's auspices and with its encouragement, had been working together to promote the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy and prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
developing Member States, which very much wanted more effective international 
co-operation in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy and were demanding balanced 
development of the Agency, had put forward many reasonable proposals for promoting those 
uses and had made important contributions to the prevention of nuclear proliferation. 
2. The Agency had done much in the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At its 
thirty-sixth session, the General Conference had adopted a number of resolutions important 
to the social and economic development of Member States, particularly the developing 
countries. The work done by the Agency on the drafting of a nuclear safety convention, the 
follow-up to the seminars on liability for nuclear damage and international aspects of the 
plutonium cycle, the Helsinki Symposium on "Electricity and the Environment", and the 
sponsoring of special studies on nuclear energy and the environment and the practical 
utilization of food irradiation had all been contributions to the promotion of nuclear science 
and technology and of related disciplines. Particularly in the field of technical assistance and 
co-operation, the Agency had taken commendable initiatives in the past year. As an 
intergovernmental organization, the Agency had been playing a unique role in promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
3. However, much remained to be done before international co-operation in the field of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy reached a satisfactory level. The industrialized countries' 
monopoly of nuclear science and technology remained virtually intact. In the name of 
nuclear non-proliferation, some developed countries were even curtailing and harming the 
legitimate rights and interests of developing countries. Such actions were detrimental to the 
development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
4. The prevention of nuclear proliferation was currently an important issue for the 
international community and would remain so in the future. China had always advocated the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 4 

complete prohibition and total destruction of nuclear weapons. It neither encouraged nor 
engaged in their proliferation, and it never assisted other States in developing them. His 
country agreed in principle that the Agency's safeguards system should be strengthened. In 
March 1992 it had acceded to the NPT, and in February 1993 it had agreed to notify the 
Agency of its imports and exports of nuclear material, thereby demonstrating its support for 
the efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 

5. However, the effectiveness of those efforts depended on a large number of interrelated 
factors. Thus, the legitimate requests of Member States - particularly the developing 
countries among them - wanting to benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy should 
not be ignored, and the development of nuclear science and technology and the nuclear 
industry in the developing countries should not be hampered under the pretext of preventing 
nuclear proliferation. China believed that an isolated or unbalanced approach to nuclear nonproliferation 
was not in keeping with the aims and principles set forth in the Agency's Statute 
and was contrary to the basic objectives of the NPT. Such an approach might ultimately 
affect the development of the Agency and the fundamental interests of the majority of its 
Member States. The Agency's Member States now had a common interest in seeing that the 
Agency adapted to the new international situation with regard to non-proliferation, in 
ensuring the fairer and more reasonable management of safeguards and in helping the Agency 
to play the role expected of it in the light of the aims and principles of the Statute. 
6. In April and May, SAGSI and the Secretariat had put together a comprehensive report 
on strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the safeguards system a 
report which merited thorough examination. In the light of the aims and principles of the 
Statute China believed, in the first place, that strengthening the effectiveness and improving 
the efficiency of the safeguards system should not jeopardize the sustained development of 
promotional activities. Enhancing the safeguards system and promoting the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy should be complementary - not independent or interchangeable - activities. 
7. Secondly, his country believed that in strengthening the effectiveness and improving 
the efficiency of the safeguards system one should abide by the basic principles of justice, 
objectivity, reasonableness and transparency. The monopolizing or manipulating of 
safeguards by a few countries should not be allowed. Any biased use of the system for the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 5 

purpose of putting pressure on Member States was inappropriate and detrimental to the 
Agency's reputation and role, and action to strengthen the system would command wide 
support only if the views of the majority of Member States were carefully discussed and 
taken into consideration. 

8. Thirdly, his country believed that safeguards cost reductions and efficiency 
improvements should not jeopardize full attainment of the inspection goals at the key stages 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. Any wilful intensification of safeguards in some countries or 
deliberate simplification of monitoring activities in others was detrimental to the development 
of the Agency's safeguards system. 
9. Technical assistance and co-operation activities were an important component of the 
Agency's work, as they contributed greatly to social and economic progress in developing 
Member States. China noted with satisfaction the considerable efforts which the Agency had 
made and the notable results which it had achieved in recent years in that sphere, particularly 
in improving scientific infrastructures and manpower training in various countries. However, 
owing to the fact that different developing countries had reached different levels with regard 
to nuclear science and technology and to management, the benefits which they derived from 
the Agency's assistance also differed. In order for the technology transfer resulting from 
such assistance to be translated more effectively and rapidly into higher productivity, the 
Agency should further intensify its work on the formulation of development strategies for 
such countries, provide them with technical assistance suited to their key development 
projects and offer them more guidance on the planning and implementation of nuclear energy 
programmes. Economic and technological co-operation among developing countries, which 
had become an important element of international co-operation, stimulated social and 
economic progress in those countries and was very important for the maintenance of world 
peace. The Agency had done much to promote that form of co-operation, and his delegation 
hoped that it would continue to do so. For its part, China was willing to play a more active 
role to that end. 
10. Member States and the international community were calling for the conclusion of a 
nuclear safety convention and the strengthening of international co-operation in nuclear safety 
and radiation protection. Since 1991, the General Conference and the Board of Governors 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 6 

had confirmed, through a number of resolutions and decisions, the necessity and urgency of 
such a convention and had appealed for the drafting process to be completed as soon as 
possible. Thanks to the joint efforts of Member States and the Secretariat, a general 
consensus had been achieved on the convention's scope and structure and on organizational 
arrangements. During the drafting process, many countries had put forward a great number 
of proposals and views which provided a sound basis for further work. There should be no 
slackening of effort. His delegation believed that present conditions in the world were now 
conducive to negotiations on the convention and that no time should be lost in implementing 
the relevant resolutions of the General Conference. China had always been positive about 
the conclusion of a nuclear safety convention and had put forward numerous constructive 
proposals in that regard which had received the wide support of the representatives of many 
countries and had been taken up by the Chairman of the Group of Experts drafting the 
convention in his summary of the results of the Group's fourth meeting. China looked 
forward to further co-operation with all countries in finalizing the convention. 

11. In China, with the rapid advance of socialist modernization, with the acceleration in 
the pace of reform and with the country's policy of openness, the nuclear energy industry 
had entered into a new phase of development. The Chinese-designed and -built first unit of 
the Qinshan nuclear power plant (a 300-MW(e) pressurized-water reactor) had been 
commissioned and connected to the grid in 1991 and was now operating at high output. 
Unit 1 of the Daya Bay nuclear power plant in Guangdong province, which had gone critical 
in July and been connected to the grid on 31 August, was expected to go into commercial 
service by the end of 1993, while Unit 2 would be commissioned in the first half of 1994. 
The basic design for an expansion of the Qinshan nuclear power plant with the construction 
work of two 600-MW(e) reactors, was complete, and the engineering design work and site 
preparations were under way. 
12. The civil nuclear fuel industry was expanding fast in order to match the growth in the 
nuclear power plant sector. Having successfully supplied fuel assemblies for the Qinshan 
nuclear power plant, the nuclear fuel fabrication plant at Yi Bin was now preparing to 
produce them for the Daya Bay nuclear power plant by the end of 1994. The Chinese 
Government had approved the construction of a pilot reprocessing plant for spent fuel from 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 7 

power reactors. The design and construction work for that plant, which was to be done in 

stages, was under way, and it was expected that the plant would be fully operational by the 

end of the century. 

13. China was a peace-loving country pursuing an independent foreign policy aimed at 
creating and maintaining the peaceful international climate which it needed in order to 

modernize. In the field of peaceful uses of nuclear energy it would continue to seek the 

friendship and co-operation of all countries on the basis of mutual respect for national 

sovereignty, non-interference in internal affairs, and equality and mutual benefit, and it 

would work for the establishment of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 

energy in the interests of world peace and worldwide development. 

14. Ms. O'LEARY (United States of America) prefaced her statement by reading 
out a message from the President of the United States to the General Conference. 

"As you begin this thirty-seventh session of the General Conference of the 
International Atomic Energy Agency, I would like to express the strong and 
continuing support of the United States of America for the vital work of the Agency. 
The United States is confident that the IAEA will continue to play a critical role in 
preventing the spread of nuclear weapons and in ensuring that the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy contributes to international security and prosperity. 

"We are pleased to join in welcoming six new Member States to the Agency. We 
look forward to working with the Governments of Armenia, Kazakhstan, the Marshall 
Islands, the Czech Republic, the Slovak Republic, and the Former Yugoslav Republic 
of Macedonia in assisting the Agency in its important work. 

"The United States commends the Director General for the Agency's vigorous and 
forthright efforts to implement safeguards in the Democratic People's Republic of 
Korea (the DPRK), and we urge the DPRK to co-operate fully with the IAEA. We 
also commend the Agency for its continued efforts to assure the destruction of Iraq's 
nuclear weapons-related capabilities and its contribution to long-term monitoring of 
Iraq's nuclear activities. 

"The United States is committed to limiting the spread of nuclear weapons. In this 
regard, we view the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as a key foundation of 
international security. We will call for its indefinite extension in 1995. 

"The United States also supports the Agency's important technical co-operation and 
assistance programmes in such diverse fields as health, agriculture, industry and 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 8 

environment. In addition, we believe the Agency's involvement in promoting nuclear 
power plant safety is extremely valuable. 

"The IAEA plays an essential role in helping to achieve a world of reduced nuclear 
tensions. The United States pledges its support in keeping the Agency a strong and 
active contributor to world peace, security and prosperity." 

15. The changes currently taking place offered the possibility of creating a new and better 
world order. As far as nuclear affairs were concerned that entailed: a shift away from the 
production to the dismantling of nuclear weapons; the reinforcement of global nonproliferation; 
the strengthening of such international institutions as the Agency; indefinite 
extension of the NPT; ensuring nuclear safety and the safe, long-term disposition of 
radioactive wastes; and the utilization of nuclear energy in agriculture, medicine, industry 
and research and - where appropriate - power generation. 
16. As the present decade proceeded, a primary task of the United States would no longer 
be to make nuclear weapons but to dismantle them. Every effort must be made, however, 
to ensure that the reduction of the nuclear arsenal was carried out safely, securely and in an 
environmentally sound manner. That called for an unwavering commitment to environmental 
restoration and to measures to clean up the residues of nearly five decades of weapons 
production. 
17. The United States was also taking steps to open up access to environmental and 
radiological information about its nuclear weapons complexes. In so doing, it would of 
course be very sensitive to the need to protect against all kinds of proliferation risk. 
However, extensive reviews aimed at the declassification of a great deal of information were 
under way. That initiative was expected not only to improve efficiency but also to increase 
transparency. Her country hoped that that new openness would serve as an example and was 
supporting the efforts of other nuclear-weapon States to make available information on their 
nuclear weapons programmes and the impact of those programmes on human health and the 
environment. 
18. In addition, and equally important, her country hoped that other Members of the 
Agency would strive for greater openness with regard to their peaceful nuclear activities. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 9 

19. The challenge of change also meant a final stop to nuclear testing. There was 
currently a de facto global moratorium on testing which the United States was championing 
and urging all nuclear Powers to uphold. Were a nation to break that moratorium now, the 
worldwide momentum towards an early comprehensive test ban and indefinite extension of 
the NPT might be lost. France, the Russian Federation and the United Kingdom were to be 
congratulated on their commitment not to carry out any tests, and her delegation fervently 
hoped that China would join those three countries and the United States in upholding the 
moratorium. 
20. Through bold, collective action the five countries in question could exercise world 
leadership in reducing - and some day perhaps eliminating - the nuclear danger. But the 
United States wanted to do more. President Clinton had affirmed the commitment of the 
United States to negotiate a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing. If the initiative received 
the support of all countries, non-proliferation would be reinforced. Other measures also 
warranted consideration. Moves to enhance the monitoring and control of the production and 
use of plutonium and highly enriched uranium might be a good way of strengthening 
collaborative non-proliferation efforts. Thus, certain fissile materials not currently under 
international safeguards could be placed under safeguards in order to expand the international 
non-proliferation regime. 
21. The dismantling of large numbers of nuclear weapons by the United States and the 
Russian Federation would generate unprecedented stocks of weapons-grade nuclear material. 
Whereas it was possible to blend down highly enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium for 
use in civilian reactors, weapons-grade plutonium presented a far more delicate problem. 
Since fully acceptable disposition technologies were not yet operational, interim safeguarded 
storage was necessary. However, the practical issues associated with preparing for and 
implementing the safeguards had to be resolved first. The United States was now addressing 
those issues. 
22. More generally, the United States favoured the conclusion of a multilateral agreement 
among nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States which would halt the production of 
plutonium and highly enriched uranium for weapons purposes. Such an agreement could 
provide the framework for similar limitation agreements in the Middle East and South Asia 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 10 

and for the entry into effect of the North-South agreement on the Korean Peninsula, whereby 
regional stability would be strengthened and the risk of new nuclear arms races reduced. The 
Agency could play an important role in verifying compliance with commitments in that 
respect. 

23. The international community was faced with the challenge of the post-Cold War era. 
Her delegation welcomed the new States joining the Agency and called on all Members of 
the Agency to accept international safeguards on their nuclear activities. The Agency had 
had to meet new challenges, first in Iraq and then in the DPRK, but the Board of Governors 
had acted with promptness and determination. 
24. With regard to Iraq, the United States strongly supported the efforts of the Agency 
and of the United Nations Special Commission to obtain that country's compliance with the 
requirements of the Security Council, and it urged other countries to do the same. 
25. With regard to the DPRK, the Agency had taken the lead in international efforts to 
convince it to demonstrate that it was complying fully with the commitments entered into 
under its safeguards agreement with the Agency. The Government of the DPRK was 
continuing to refuse to comply with those commitments, and its actions in that regard had 
forced the Board to refer the matter to the United Nations Security Council earlier in the 
year. Since then, the United States had gone to extraordinary lengths in an effort to find a 
way to persuade the DPRK to remain a party to the NPT and honour fully its obligations 
towards the Agency and its NPT safeguards agreement. Her country had fully supported the 
Agency's actions regarding the DPRK and would continue to do so. 
26. The Agency's Secretariat had started to investigate new approaches aimed at 
strengthening and streamlining the implementation of safeguards. New ideas and approaches 
were needed in order to adapt the safeguards system to new challenges. The United States 
supported Agency initiatives to utilize science and technology in strengthening and 
streamlining the safeguards system. 
27. President Clinton had reaffirmed that prevention of the spread of nuclear weapons was 
at the top of the United States' national security agenda. Strengthened safeguards, new limits 
on nuclear weapons materials, enhanced co-operation among the nuclear suppliers and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 11 

intensified efforts aimed at regional confidence-building were but a few of the nonproliferation 
measures which the United States was committed to pursuing in collaboration 
with other countries. Her country was also looking forward to working together with other 
NPT parties with a view to an indefinite extension of the NPT in 1995, for it considered that 
treaty to be one of the vital foundations of the non-proliferation regime. The fact that 
virtually all countries had become parties to the NPT in good faith demonstrated the world's 
continuing commitment to preventing the spread of nuclear weapons. Non-parties to 
the NPT, which were few in number, were becoming increasingly isolated. In the present 
era of dramatic change, a strong and durable NPT was even more essential. Without the 
stability which it provided, the shift from building weapons to dismantling them could lose 
its momentum. For those reasons, the United States would continue to work for universal 
accession to the NPT, and particularly for the rapid accession of all countries of the former 
Soviet Union. The United States also remained convinced that indefinite extension of 
the NPT in 1995 would best serve the cause of non-proliferation. 

28. Another important Agency mission to which the United States remained firmly 
committed was promotion of the peaceful uses of the atom for the benefit of all mankind. 
Many countries had benefited enormously from the scientific and technical activities of the 
Agency in such varied fields as health, agriculture and the environment. The United States 
supported the Agency's programme of technical assistance to developing Member States and 
encouraged voluntary contributions to the TACF and also contributions in kind. 
29. The future of nuclear energy was uncertain. In some countries it had been many 
years since a new plant had been planned or ordered, whereas in others new power plants 
were being built or planned. No global trend had yet emerged. Choosing the right mix of 
energy sources required the complex balancing of economic, environmental, safety, public 
health and non-proliferation factors. Developments in technology would no doubt shape the 
choice in ways that could not yet be fully anticipated. Governments should guard, however, 
against energy developments that posed excessive risks - whether in terms of public health, 
safety, the environment or proliferation. 
30. The Agency had always placed a high priority on activities to improve and enhance 
nuclear safety in countries which had decided to use nuclear energy for electricity production. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 12 

Since the Munich Summit of industrialized States in July 1992, concerted efforts had been 
under way, both bilaterally and multilaterally, to address the issue of nuclear safety 
assistance. The Tokyo Summit in July 1993 had given further impetus to those efforts. The 
United States was implementing an ambitious programme of nuclear safety support and 
assistance to the Russian Federation, Ukraine and Eastern Europe. 

31. The United States, which had appreciated the support provided by the Agency in that 
context, believed that the Agency could play an increasingly important role in three areas. 
Firstly, the United States - like many other countries - had found that the presence of a 
strong, independent and technically competent regulatory organization was indispensable to 
the achievement of a high level of nuclear safety. 
32. Secondly, a key feature of the nuclear programmes of western industrialized States 
had been arrangements governing civil liability for nuclear damage which protected both the 
public and industry in the event of radiological accidents, with fair compensation for potential 
victims. It was clear that States which had not yet adopted such arrangements should do so 
promptly so as to enable private companies to participate fully in nuclear safety co-operation. 
33. The third area where the Agency could play an increasingly important role was the 
finalization of a nuclear safety convention providing the legal basis for national and 
multinational efforts to improve nuclear safety. During the past two years, the United States 
had been participating actively in Agency efforts to draw up such a convention. That 
instrument could codify the basic principles of nuclear power safety and establish a system 
for reviews by the parties of the safety measures taken in implementing the convention. The 
United States delegation hoped that that convention would be concluded during 1994, but 
believed that it would be effective only if it was acceded to by all countries with active and 
planned nuclear power programmes. 
34. Lastly, the Agency had long-established programmes to promote technical solutions 
for the safe management of spent fuel and radioactive waste. Her delegation commended the 
Agency's efforts to assist developing Member States and valued the forum which the Agency 
provided for international exchanges on radioactive waste issues. Her country was pleased 
to be participating in the process of updating guidance on radioactive waste management and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 13 

developing a consensus on fundamental principles. Consequently, it looked forward to a 
separate convention on nuclear waste management. 

35. In conclusion, she said that when it had been founded, some 40 years previously, the 
Agency had broken new ground. In the present era of change, the Agency was facing not 
only serious challenges but also new opportunities. Its expertise could be tapped in support 
of efforts aimed at limiting the production and use of nuclear weapons material. Also, the 
Agency provided a credible framework for international efforts in areas ranging from the 
enhancement of nuclear safety technology to the monitoring of excess plutonium from the 
dismantling of weapons. Vigorous but impartial exercise of the Agency's inspection rights 
could significantly reduce the risk of proliferation. The challenge was indeed great, but the 
opportunities were also immense and there was no doubt that the Agency's future was bright. 
36. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said that his country was aware of the 
constant endeavours of the Agency to achieve a balance between its two main functions: to 
provide technical assistance to its Member States on one hand, and to ensure safety and 
radiation protection and to verify non-diversion to armaments on the other. It was the 
responsibility of the General Conference, as the policy-making body of the Agency, to guide 
those endeavours. 
37. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy posed a dilemma. While they provided grounds 
for hope, they also gave rise to public fears, particularly since the Chernobyl accident, at a 
time when many developing countries were facing a multitude of problems due to overpopulation 
and ever-increasing human needs - problems which were likely to worsen given 
the difficulties which those countries had in acquiring modern nuclear technology and 
enjoying its benefits. 
38. The items on the General Conference's agenda reflected the growing interest of the 
Agency in nuclear safety and radiation protection, an area in which there was still much to 
be done. The development of new radiation protection standards, the conclusion and 
ratification of related agreements and the proposed programme for education and training in 
radiation protection and nuclear safety were probably steps in the right direction, but safety 
depended essentially on the commitment of the competent authorities. The fears in Austria 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 14 

about the presence in neighbouring countries of nuclear power plants without adequate safety 
levels might imply that progress was being made with regard to the theoretical aspects of 
safety but not the practical aspects. Given the fact that the safety situation in Eastern Europe 
had become known only since the countries in question had adopted a policy of transparency, 
what about the situation in States which were carrying out clandestine peaceful - or even 
military - nuclear activities? 

39. The Agency, which had been entrusted by the international community with an 
important mission in the field of nuclear disarmament, was encouraging the adoption of 
regional agreements to that end. The results achieved by the Agency in the Middle East, 
however, were very limited. Furthermore, not all States in the region had acceded to 
the NPT. Saudi Arabia hoped that all of them would give the matter the attention which it 
deserved so that the Agency's mission might be crowned with success and they might enjoy 
peace and security. 
40. The Agency was seeking to fulfil one of its essential functions by promoting the 
development and practical utilization of atomic energy for peaceful purposes and also related 
research. It was following a rational policy of, for the main part, implementing activities 
approved within its technical co-operation programme. The share of that programme devoted 
to the "Middle East and Europe" region had been reduced. In that connection he wished to 
point out that the situation and the concerns of the two groups of countries comprising that 
region were different: the countries of the Middle East were more interested in nuclear 
energy applications in agriculture, health, hydrology and industry, whereas the interests of 
European countries were currently focused on the safety of nuclear facilities. 
41. Saudi Arabia, which was keen to strengthen its technical co-operation with the 
Agency, had recently hosted a regional workshop for countries of the Middle East in Jiddah, 
thereby supporting the Agency's efforts to provide specialist training in advanced industrial 
applications of isotopes and irradiation. 
42. The General Conference was well aware of the importance of providing developing 
countries with opportunities for education and training in radiation protection and nuclear 
safety. In resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/584 it had called for the development of a suitable 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 15 

programme. Saudi Arabia supported the measures taken by the Agency in establishing the 
proposed programme and hoped that its goals would be attained. 

43. The General Conference had for a number of years been considering the problem of 
world shortages of potable water and had requested the Agency to look into the possibilities 
of using nuclear energy for water desalination. The General Conference had before it a 
document (GC(XXXVII)/INF/323) which reported on how the Agency had responded to 
resolutions adopted on that matter. Saudi Arabia, which had been one of the first Middle 
East countries to satisfy its needs for potable water by seawater desalination, had taken note 
of the conclusion reached in the Agency's studies that it could be economically feasible to 
use nuclear energy instead of fossil fuel in seawater desalination plants. In anticipation of 
an increase in its potable water needs, his country had initiated with the Agency a technical 
co-operation project on the economic feasibility of seawater desalination using nuclear energy 
in Saudi Arabia. In view of the extreme importance of seawater desalination for many 
developing countries, Saudi Arabia hoped that the Agency would be able - despite its 
financial difficulties - to allocate funds for the activities in question and that Member States 
would continue to make voluntary contributions in support of those activities. 
44. Turning to the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries, the 
Agency had, in response to resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/588, prepared a detailed project 
proposal. His delegation had welcomed that proposal, which had been submitted to the 
Board of Governors in June in document GOV/2669. Saudi Arabia felt that food irradiation 
techniques would help developing countries overcome difficulties in providing food for their 
steadily increasing populations. The Agency was the appropriate organization for providing 
technical assistance and support to those countries, and his delegation hoped very much that 
it would achieve what was expected of it. 
45. With regard to strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the 
safeguards system, as could be seen from the documents under consideration, the Agency, 
in an effort to reduce costs and extend the current safeguards approach, had made various 
proposals regarding the detection of non-declared nuclear activities and the reporting of 
specific information, and had called for increased co-operation with national accounting and 
control systems. His delegation was confident that the Agency would continue to examine 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 16 

SAGSI's recommendations and do its best to evaluate them and follow them up. Although 
his delegation was convinced of the importance of safeguards and supported the Agency's 
efforts to strengthen their effectiveness and improve their efficiency, it felt that promotional 
activities should not be allowed to suffer as a result. 

46. His delegation had no objection to divergences of opinion between countries, but it 
felt that unyielding positions might impede progress in the consideration of some issues that 
had been on the agenda of the General Conference for years. It therefore sincerely hoped 
that, despite appearances, the consideration of issues such as the financing of safeguards and 
the financing of technical assistance or of items relating to Article VI of the Statute had not 
become a routine exercise for the General Conference. 
47. Saudi Arabia was somewhat concerned about the financial situation of the Agency as 
described in the Note by the Secretariat dated 10 September 1993. Delays in the payment 
of contributions were creating serious financial difficulties for the Agency and were 
preventing the implementation of part of its programme. Recalling that Saudi Arabia had 
paid its assessed contribution in full, he called on those States which had not yet done 
likewise to pay their assessed contributions soon. 
48. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the favourable climate which had recently 
been created in the Middle East would have a positive effect on the future work of the 
Agency. 
49. Mr. OCHOA ANTICH (Venezuela) said that his country had always firmly 
supported the Agency's activities, particularly those relating to technical assistance and cooperation. 
He thanked the Agency for its contribution to ARCAL and urged it to continue 
its efforts to provide the financial resources required for ARCAL projects. He also thanked 
the countries and institutions outside Latin America which had supported such projects. 
50. On the other hand, Venezuela was concerned about the fact that the percentage of 
technical assistance assigned to Latin America was still declining, as shown by figures in the 
annual report for 1992. The decrease over the past ten years in pledges made to the TACF 
as a percentage of the TACF target was also a matter for concern. Further matters for 
concern were the decline in the amounts actually paid relative to the target and the 12% cut 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 17 

being made in 1994 financial plans because of financial difficulties - a cut which would have 
a negative impact on the Department of Technical Co-operation. 

51. As a party to the NPT, Venezuela was particularly attached to the Agency's 
safeguards system, which had helped to prevent the horizontal proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, but it was worried about the discrepancies which had arisen during implementation 
of the safeguards agreement problems raised between the DPRK and the Agency. Clearly, 
if the matter was not resolved an awkward precedent would be set. That would have to be 
taken into account at the 1995 conference at which the question of extending the NPT and 
that of measures to establish a truly universal non-proliferation regime were to be considered. 
The situation created by the DPRK, which might indicate a deterioration of the nonproliferation 
picture, called for a more comprehensive and coherent approach to nonproliferation. 
That possibility had prompted the international community to renew its efforts 
to create an international security system and, under the terms of its Statute and of its 
relationship agreement with the United Nations, the Agency would have an important role 
to play in such a system. 
52. His Government supported the work of SAGSI, which was studying ways of reducing 
safeguards implementation costs while maintaining safeguards effectiveness. However, a 
suitable legal framework was necessary for the adoption of some SAGSI proposals, the 
technical, financial and political implications of which would have to be analysed. 
53. The Agency's activities in the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection were of 
great interest to the whole of mankind. His delegation therefore wished once more to 
emphasize that measures relating directly to power reactor safety should be financed from 
extrabudgetary contributions. That would free financial resources to improve the safety of 
non-power nuclear applications and to strengthen the radiological protection infrastructures 
in developing countries. 
54. His country favoured the development of internationally accepted basic principles, 
standards and guidelines for the safe use of nuclear technology. It therefore appreciated the 
work done so far by the Group of Experts working on a nuclear safety convention. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 18 

55. With the payment which it had made, Venezuela had wished to demonstrate its 
determination to regularize its financial situation and contribute to the attainment of the 
objectives and the fulfilment of the functions referred to in Articles II and HI of the Statute. 
In conclusion, his delegation warmly thanked the Director General and the staff of the 
Secretariat, and particularly staff members in the Department of Technical Co-operation, for 
the quality of their work. 
Mr. Kiener (Switzerland) took the Chair. 

56. Mr. SAFRA (Tunisia), having welcomed the countries recently approved for 
membership of the Agency, said that the organization had ever since its establishment 
endeavoured to promote the peaceful applications of nuclear energy and technology 
throughout the world. It had also made considerable efforts to strengthen international cooperation 
in the areas of nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
57. His delegation was concerned that the financial difficulties of the Agency might 
jeopardize its programmes. For its part, Tunisia had always paid its contributions on time, 
and in the present year it had made a voluntary contribution of US $16 000. His country 
urged all Member States to give the Agency their financial and moral support. 
58. Tunisia attached particular importance to the strengthening of technical co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear science and techniques with all countries, and in particular 
the Arab and African countries. As host country of the Arab Atomic Energy Agency, it was 
doing everything possible to strengthen co-operation between the Arab countries in the field 
of atomic energy. Tunisia had been the first African country to ratify the AFRA agreement. 
Also, it had recently hosted several scientific and technical meetings convened with a view 
to strengthening regional co-operation and the Agency's activities, including one AFRA coordination 
meeting on the monitoring of radioactivity in the environment and another on nondestructive 
testing. In addition, it was also currently participating in ten regional projects. 
He thanked the French and Spanish Governments for supporting AFRA, and expressed the 
hope that other States and organizations would follow their example, so that the AFRA 
programme would attain its objectives and the AFRA projects - which had all been approved 
by the Agency - would be implemented. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 354 
page 19 

59. The developing countries set great store by strengthened co-operation with the 
Agency, as that was the ideal framework for healthy and balanced international co-operation 
in the peaceful applications of nuclear techniques. Tunisia believed that the Agency should 
concentrate its efforts on improving small and medium power reactors from the point of view 
of quality and cost so that developing countries could use them in meeting their urgent needs 
for energy and potable water. It would also like the Agency to intensify its training activities 
and to organize scientific meetings on the progress being made with regard to reactors. 
Tunisia was doing everything possible to support important activities of that kind. In Djerba, 
from 6 to 10 September 1993, it had hosted an Agency meeting on small and medium power 
reactors in which many experts from industrialized and developing countries had participated. 
60. In resolution GC(XXXIV)/RES/540, the General Conference had asked the Agency 
to assess the costs of potable water production and to compare the costs of desalination by 
nuclear and other means with a view to remedying chronic water shortages due to population 
growth. Many developing countries hoped that suitable and economically feasible nuclear 
techniques for the desalination of seawater would be found. The Agency should intensify its 
efforts in that area and support regional programmes for desalination of seawater using 
nuclear techniques and also studies relating to the development and design of small and 
medium power reactors. 
61. Irradiation was an ideal tool for ensuring food self-sufficiency, particularly in 
developing countries where food production and conservation involved chronic problems, and 
closer collaboration in that area was desirable. Tunisia planned to build a pilot irradiation 
facility and, in order to ensure the co-ordination of all projects relating to the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, had decided to set up a national centre for nuclear science and techniques. 
It was counting on the Agency to support the project. 
62. While doing everything it could to help Member States derive maximum benefit from 
nuclear techniques, the Agency was also seeking to limit the associated risks. His delegation 
welcomed the fact that so many States had acceded to the NPT and commended the Agency 
for its efforts in that respect. However, accession to the NPT could produce the desired 
result only if there was an effective safeguards system, and all Member States should 
therefore sign safeguards agreements with the Agency, as Tunisia had done in 1989. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 20 

63. The efforts to bring about peace in the Middle East had as their final aim the 
strengthening of security throughout the world. His delegation was convinced that 
disarmament in general and the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in particular contributed 
to the achievement of that objective. Questions relating to non-proliferation should therefore 
be settled globally, on the basis of the principle that comprehensive safeguards should be 
applied to all nuclear activities in the Middle East. That would be in line with efforts to 
make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone and would provide the best guarantee of 
a peaceful, global and just solution to the problems which the region had been experiencing 
for several decades. 
64. Tunisia, which had full confidence in the Agency's efforts in that respect, was 
convinced that the establishment of such a zone would speed up the process of nonproliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction and contribute to world peace and security. His 
delegation would like to see all States of the world working towards that objective and 
helping the Agency to accomplish its inspection tasks. 
65. All Member States recognized the importance of international nuclear safeguards, but 
it should be recalled that the implementation of safeguards was a heavy burden for the 
Agency. The industrialized countries, which were benefiting from nuclear energy, should 
therefore make a greater contribution to the financing of safeguards, without prejudice to 
technical co-operation. Safeguards should be applied to all members of the international 
community and in all areas, so that nuclear science and techniques might serve mankind and 
peace prevail throughout the world. 
66. In conclusion, he thanked the Director General and all of the Agency's staff for their 
efforts to accomplish the difficult tasks assigned to them. 
67. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba ) said that, in the present world situation, 
international organizations had a more important role than ever to play in seeking solutions 
to the pressing problems of mankind. The widening development gap between different 
countries and regions, worsening poverty and environmental pollution were problems which 
had to be tackled at the international level. As it had already been shown that nuclear energy 
could help to resolve those problems, the Agency's work became more important by the day. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 21 

68. Cuba was in a difficult situation due to an intensification of the economic embargo 
to which it had been subject for over three decades and the natural catastrophes which had 
occurred during the current year. Also, there had been an epidemic of unknown origin for 
the combating of which a major effort - with the very timely support of the Agency - had 
been necessary. Faced with that situation, Cuba was working actively to increase its exports 
and develop tourism, increase agricultural production for internal consumption, achieve a 
more rational utilization of energy and maintain health and education standards. In that 
context, the need for nuclear techniques was becoming increasingly apparent. A modern 
production and development centre for radiopharmaceuticals and labelled compounds was due 
to enter into service in 1994; that would facilitate dissemination of the nuclear techniques in 
question. 
69. The temporary suspension of construction work on the Juragua nuclear power plant 
did not mean the end of all activities relating to nuclear power generation. With a view to 
a resumption of construction (possibly in association with third parties) various possibilities 
were being considered. Also, the Cuban Parliament had recently emphasized its support for 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, including nuclear power. In that connection, the 
importance had been stressed of continuing to develop Cuba's scientific potential and 
infrastructure in the nuclear field and of restructuring Cuba's nuclear programme so that 
greater reliance was placed on the work of Cuban scientists and engineers. A great deal was 
being done to implement the wishes of the Cuban Parliament. 
70. Cuba had also continued to strengthen its nuclear safety and radiation protection 
infrastructure and to improve its national system for supervising the safety of establishments 
using radioactive materials, of which the country currently had about 190. Work was 
continuing on the evaluation - with a view to implementation - of new international 
recommendations in the area of radiological protection. 
71. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities were making a 
significant contribution to the achievement of his country's development objectives. He 
thanked the Agency and others who had contributed in one way or another. In 1992, Cuba 
had completed four projects - relating to the improvement of medical diagnostic services, the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 22 

use of nuclear techniques in sedimentation studies and the monitoring of environmental 
radioactivity. 

72. With regard to the question of making more rational use of the funds available for 
technical assistance, Cuba had studied with interest the ideas presented by the Secretariat and 
analyses carried out by the Board of Governors. He strongly supported the idea of assigning 
the funds available for technical assistance to the solution of specific problems so as to 
achieve maximum social and economic impact, and he therefore believed that projects should 
be aimed at the final user, who should be closely involved in project implementation. His 
country, which had been following that direction for several years, had formulated its project 
proposals for the current and the following biennial cycle in accordance with that idea. 
73. In that connection, the idea of establishing model projects might well prove to be a 
good one, and Cuba was working on the formulation of a model project proposal relating to 
the sterile insect technique. However, he hoped that, when model projects were being 
established, priority consideration would be given to the needs of and the infrastructures 
available in the requesting countries, so that the assistance was not subordinated to the 
Agency's general objectives. 
74. Cuba continued to support the Agency's activities relating to regional co-operation, 
particularly within the framework of ARCAL. Commendable efforts were being made to 
increase the effectiveness of ARCAL - efforts reflected in the strategy approved at the tenth 
technical co-ordination meeting. 
75. Cuba, which was following with interest the Agency's activities relating to nuclear 
safety and radiological protection, was prepared to offer the services of scientists and 
scientific centres in support of the programme for education and training in that area and to 
participate in the review of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection and in 
Agency activities to improve the safety of power plants of Russian design. 
76. The Nuclear Safety Convention currently being drafted should aim to raise the general 
level of nuclear safety. It should apply to all nuclear facilities and be based on the principle 
that nuclear safety was primarily the responsibility of the individual State. Also, 
international co-operation and technology exchange should be promoted within the framework 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 23 

of the convention. The Cuban delegation wished to emphasize that the convention should in 
no way limit the access of developing countries to nuclear power technologies and to other 
peaceful nuclear applications, for it was precisely such applications that developing countries 
needed in order to solve their social and economic problems. 

77. In recent years, the Agency's safeguards activities had been at the centre of attention 
of the world community, which was urging that the system be strengthened and in particular 
calling for universal accession to multilateral non-proliferation treaties and for a ban on 
nuclear weapons. As a founder State of the Agency, Cuba had not stood by while efforts 
were being made in that area. Cuba had retained the political will to make its modest 
contribution to any dialogue which might lead to the realization of those objectives, at the 
same time defending the principles of unconditional respect for the sovereignty of States and 
compliance with international obligations voluntarily undertaken. Thus, since the beginning 
of its nuclear programme Cuba had offered sufficient guarantees concerning its peaceful 
nature and had concluded the relevant safeguards agreements with the Agency. 
78. With regard to the Tlatelolco Treaty, Cuba, in a sincere desire to contribute to the 
integration of Latin America, would accede to it on the basis of the principles just mentioned, 
even if the main reasons which had prevented its accession thus far remained valid or had 
been strengthened. It was ready to accede as soon as the accession of all other countries of 
the region had become effective. 
79. Many years had passed since the Agency had set up the present safeguards system, 
and all agreed that adjustments were needed in order to update it in the light of current 
scientific and technical developments. Cuba had always been willing to participate in a 
serious and constructive manner in any necessary analysis based on principles which would 
ensure that the safeguards system was both effective and efficient. Safeguards, which were 
an integral part of the present non-proliferation regime, should help in establishing a climate 
of international confidence, and it was therefore impossible to isolate safeguards from other 
questions with implications for the achievement of that objective. It would be difficult to 
establish such a climate of confidence while archaic practices such as the unjust embargo 
imposed on Cuba remained, while disarmament efforts were lacking the necessary urgency 
and while resources were not being freed for development. Within the framework of a 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 24 

strengthened non-proliferation regime, future safeguards should be designed not to maintain 
the prerogatives of States possessing nuclear weapons and the current technological and social 
imbalances, but to ensure the peaceful development of States which did not possess such 
weapons and which did not present any threat to humanity. That would also enable the 
present generation to meet its obligations to future generations. 

80. In conclusion, it was essential to continue efforts to raise nuclear safety and radiation 
protection levels throughout the world and to fulfil moral obligations towards countries which 
urgently needed nuclear power for their development. Cuba believed that the Agency should 
devote itself to such efforts in the coming years. 
81. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), congratulating the Director 
General on his re-election, said that, as always, his excellent report to the General 
Conference and the actions he had taken pursuant to resolutions adopted at previous sessions 
of the General Conference deserved high praise. 
82. Countries looked upon the international organizations as fora where global concerns 
could be dealt with effectively. Such fora were perceived as gatherings of States with equal 
rights - gatherings free of segregation and prejudice and devoted to the service of mankind. 
Unfortunately, at present the reality was somewhat different. During the Cold War, owing 
to the conflict of interests between the two world Powers, the international organizations did 
not succeed in addressing global problems with the necessary effectiveness. Now that the 
Cold War was over, they were the object of even stronger criticism. It was often said that 
they seemed to have lost their sense of direction and their effectiveness and that they were 
unable to produce tangible remedies for the world's troubles. The rumour was even heard 
that certain international bodies, in particular the United Nations and its Security Council, 
had been transformed into instruments which served pre-ordained objectives. 
83. The post-Cold War era had started with the premature notion that a new world order 
was being ushered in. Some had hoped for a world without the dominance of one or several 
States over the rest solely on the basis of misconceived notions of superiority. As yet, 
nothing had emerged to confirm those hopes. Instead, many were predicting an era 
characterized by lack of vision, vague objectives and poor statesmanship. In order to prevent 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 25 

the international organizations' ineffectiveness in dealing with global problems from leading 
to a highly volatile situation, what was needed was conscientious scrutiny of the present 
situation and a reassessment of the role of those organizations in handling global social and 
political issues - in particular the organizations with sensitive mandates. 

84. The Islamic Republic of Iran believed that the Member States of the international 
organizations should undertake such an initiative and endeavour to coexist on the same legal 
footing as a body of independent, responsible States whose mission was to serve, not the 
interests of a particular State or group of States, but those of mankind. 
85. The lamentably ambivalent role of the United Nations in handling the problems of the 
Balkans, the Horn of Africa, the Middle East and other troubled areas around the globe was 
a disturbing reminder that the organization was losing sight of its basic raison d'etre. 
86. For example, many believed that, apart from having failed to identify the causes of 
the crisis in Bosnia Herzegovina, the United Nations had committed a fundamental error by 
participating in a plan under which the legitimate government of a European Member State 
of the United Nations was forced to agree to being dismembered by a brutal campaign of 
aggression and genocide and a loathsome policy of ethnic cleansing. 
87. Others maintained that the United Nations should not assume a militaristic stance or 
play the role of a world policemen trying to enforce dictated policy objectives. Many 
Member States of the United Nations found it difficult to reconcile such unfamiliar - indeed 
absurd - procedures with the spirit of the United Nations Charter, even under humanitarian 
pretexts. A particular case in point was the endorsement by the United Nations of the 
discriminatory disarmament policies promoted by certain States. 
88. Others feared that such ambivalence and obscurity, particularly where the tasks of the 
United Nations and the Security Council encroached upon the mandates of affiliated 
organizations, might adversely affect the latter. With regard to the Agency, it should be 
stated in all fairness that, on the whole, it had so far carried out the tasks assigned to it 
admirably despite the complexities of the present world situation. That was in large measure 
due to the skills of the Director General and the dedication of the Secretariat. Happily, there 
was no cause to level serious criticism at them. However, the same could not be said of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 26 

certain other organizations belonging to the United Nations system, which had recently been 
subjected to extremely serious criticism. 

89. In order to avoid sinking into complete pessimism, it should be recalled that the 
founding documents of the international organizations were basically sound, for they had 
been drafted by men of vision. Time and geopolitical changes, together with certain 
arbitrary interpretations of those documents might, however, have resulted in some degree 
of deviation from the intended objectives. The Islamic Republic of Iran therefore believed 
that, in the interests of avoiding such deviation, there was a need for standing committees, 
within the international organizations, charged with determining the extent to which those 
organizations' present activities conformed to the spirit of their founding documents. There 
was perhaps more tolerance of self-criticism in the Agency than elsewhere, since there 
already existed a working group for that purpose, although it was informal and its mandate 
was limited. He proposed that the group set an example by establishing a standing 
committee, with a broad mandate, to determine the extent to which the Agency's activities 
conformed to the Statute. Other international organizations should also take such initiatives. 
90. His delegation, which had read the annual report for 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) with 
interest, noted with regret that the Agency was still operating under financial constraints. 
His delegation hoped that all Member States which were behind in their payments, 
particularly those whose financial obligations were greatest, would quickly pay what they 
owed. 
91. In the previous few years, the Agency had had to deal with a number of issues of 
unprecedented importance and exceptional complexity, among them the strengthening of 
safeguards and international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety and the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
92. The strengthening of safeguards had been the subject of lengthy discussions, where 
some progress had been made. However, the task had by no means been completed. It was 
to be hoped that all the newly independent States which had been approved for membership 
of the Agency would soon conclude comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 27 

93. The Islamic Republic of Iran supported and would continue to support all efforts of 
the Agency to enhance the effectiveness of its safeguards regime. Under its policy of 
openness and transparency in the nuclear field, his country had taken the initiative of inviting 
the Agency to visit nuclear facilities of its choice in order to verify their peaceful utilization. 
Subsequently, an Agency team had travelled to Iran and carried out verification activities to 
the Agency's satisfaction. It was to be hoped that other Member States would follow that 
example. 
94. However, the Islamic Republic of Iran believed that, in view of the current budgetary 
constraints, the main objective should be cost-effectiveness. His delegation had noted with 
concern the statement of one Governor, made at the 815th meeting of the Board, about 
safeguards in his country, "Each year over 700 person-days of inspection were expended on 
safeguarding material which could not be used for producing nuclear weapons ... Six hundred 
of the inspection days ... and nearly 80% of the 170 sites focused on spent reactor fuel, 
material which was without value to a weapons programme ..." That was a good indication 
of the potential for improving the allocation of financial resources in safeguards 
implementation. Furthermore, his country continued to believe that the safeguards regime 
should be considered essentially as a mechanism for verifying that non-proliferation 
commitments in the broad sense had been honoured in conformity with the spirit and the 
letter of the NPT. Therefore, allocating budgetary resources for safeguards implementation 
in nuclear-weapon States without any consideration of vertical proliferation had no value and 
was completely unjustified. 
95. In view of its complex nature, international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear 
safety was still an open issue requiring further efforts. His country had stated on numerous 
occasions that it regarded the issue as equal in importance to the strengthening of safeguards, 
and even more important in certain cases. Thus, the potential risks of keeping certain 
outdated nuclear installations - particularly installations serving military purposes - in 
operation were a cause of great concern to some Member States. A case in point was the 
Dimona nuclear reactor in occupied Palestine, which continued to be operated without being 
subject to safeguards. No one knew the conditions under which that antiquated reactor, used 
solely for non-peaceful purposes, was being operated. However, the entire population of the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 28 

occupied territories and neighbouring States lived in constant fear of the catastrophes it might 
cause. In Iran's opinion, such cases required the attention of the international community 
in general and the Agency in particular, and his delegation would like the Director General 
to consider the possibility of looking into the matter. 

96. The Agency was to be commended on its efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free 
zones in various regions, and in particular for having organized, in June, a workshop on the 
question of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. The Islamic Republic of Iran 
considered that such informative gatherings, although insufficient in themselves, were very 
useful in addressing such important issues. Recalling that no real progress had been made 
on the question of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa until South Africa responded to the 
wishes of the international community by dismantling its nuclear weapons and submitting its 
nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards, he said that a parallel could be drawn in respect of 
the Middle East. As long as Israel, with the full support of the United States, continued to 
refuse to respect the wishes of the international community, the concept of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East would - he feared - remain a dormant one. 
97. The fact that the United States and other western Powers were, on one hand, 
imposing severe political and economic sanctions on certain States which they accused of 
fostering the proliferation of nuclear weapons and related technologies and, on the other, 
displaying complete tolerance of Israel's nuclear policies, which were in complete violation 
of international treaties, was equivalent to tacit approval of the Israeli regime's access to 
nuclear weapons. It was difficult for the international community to understand such double 
standards. 
98. The Islamic Republic of Iran had been the first State to propose the establishment of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It continued to subscribe to that concept and 
was prepared to consider constructive initiatives relating to it. Clearly, the international 
community should display firmness in obliging Israel to respect the views of the majority. 
99. In recent years the progress of peaceful applications of nuclear energy had been 
drastically curtailed, mainly because of nuclear accidents, fear of nuclear weapons 
proliferation, an abundance of cheap fossil fuels and a reduction in the global demand for 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 29 

electricity. Nuclear technology and, by extension, the nuclear industry were undergoing the 
most severe recession they had experienced in their 50-year history. In particular, the 
construction of new nuclear power plants had been halted almost completely. That was 
unfortunate, because nuclear power technology was just reaching maturity and nuclear power 
plants were well set to establish a reputation as a remarkably safe and environmentally very 
sound means of producing electricity. However, the Islamic Republic of Iran believed that 
the establishment of effective and strengthened safeguards and the implementation of 
measures to enhance nuclear safety and radiation protection, combined with consideration of 
the world's serious environmental problems, would provide ample grounds for a renaissance 
of the nuclear power industry in the near future. 

100. The recession in the nuclear market, combined with a drastic reduction in nuclear 
technology transfers by supplier States, had seriously affected the promotional side of the 
Agency's activities. Although it supported the Agency's regulatory role, his country 
considered that - as clearly stipulated in the Statute - the organization had other roles to play 
as well. 
101. The majority of Member States, particularly those undergoing development, were 
seeking tangible results from the peaceful applications of nuclear energy in support of their 
development programmes. At present, however, there seemed to be more drawbacks than 
advantages to involvement in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, as developing 
States could easily be accused of contributing to nuclear proliferation if they showed an 
interest in such applications. 
102. The Islamic Republic of Iran hoped that soon a balance would again be established 
between the Agency's regulatory and promotional activities. After all, no one wished to 
arrive at a point where the developing States began to question the benefits of membership 
of an entirely regulatory organization. 
103. Turning to the question of his country's nuclear programmes, he said that, contrary 
to unjust and unfounded allegations, made primarily by the United States, they were entirely 
peaceful. Apart from the innuendoes and falsifications of Zionist-sponsored media pursuing 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 30 

political goals, there had never been a basis for those allegations, no supporting proof having 
been provided so far for the attention of the international community. 

104. The Islamic Republic of Iran remained fully prepared to co-operate with the Agency 
in the fulfilment of its tasks, the most important of which was to promote the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. However, owing to the aforementioned allegations and 
innuendoes, European suppliers had drastically curtailed his country's access to peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, in particular in the nuclear power sector. Consequently, in 
the light of Iran's development and energy programmes his Government had concluded with 
the Government of the Russian Federation and the Government of China bilateral agreements 
on co-operation in peaceful applications of nuclear energy. On the basis of those agreements, 
consideration was being given to the conclusion of contracts for the construction of new 
nuclear power plants and the completion of the Bushehr nuclear power plant. 
105. The Islamic Republic of Iran believed that all States should have the right to benefit 
from peaceful applications of nuclear energy provided they respected the relevant 
international codes of practice. If that was considered to be the case, and it would after all 
be in keeping with the spirit of the NPT, then there should really be no prejudice on the part 
of suppliers. If supplier States changed their attitude, the chances of an extension of the NPT 
in 1995 would be considerably greater. 
106. Mr. HGBERG (Sweden) recalled the importance which his Government 
attached to the NPT and said that with 160 parties, including all the nuclear-weapon States, 
it was the foremost international disarmament treaty. Sweden would like all States to accede 
to the NPT, thereby making it truly universal, and was firmly convinced of the need to 
extend it indefinitely in 1995. Also, Sweden considered that a comprehensive nuclear test 
ban treaty covering all nuclear explosions would be an important element in the nonproliferation 
regime, and it had proposed that the Agency be given a prominent verification 
role under such a treaty. Sweden welcomed the progress made towards bringing the 
Tlatelolco Treaty fully into force and sincerely hoped that all States in Latin America would 
accede to it. In addition, his country noted with satisfaction that work on a treaty for a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa was progressing well, and it was grateful to the Agency 
for its efforts in that regard. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 31 

107. His delegation hoped that those States parties to the NPT which had not yet done so 
would conclude and implement without delay the required safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. It had listened with deep concern to the reports presented by the Director General 
to the Board of Governors the previous week on the application of the safeguards agreement 
between the Agency and the DPRK. He urged the DPRK to fulfil all its obligations under 
that agreement. His delegation endorsed the actions which the Director General had taken 
in an effort to implement the agreement and commended the Secretariat for the objective 
manner in which it had proceeded. 
108. Likewise, in calling on Iraq to comply fully with the resolutions adopted by the 
Security Council, his delegation commended the Director General and the Secretariat for 
what they were doing in that regard. Emphasizing that the safeguards system was a key 
element of the non-proliferation regime, he said that all parties involved in international 
nuclear co-operation and trade should undertake to ensure the full transparency of their 
nuclear activities through comprehensive Agency safeguards. The principle of requiring fullscope 
safeguards for nuclear exports was another important element of the undertaking in 
question, and the nuclear-weapon States had a particular responsibility in that regard. 
109. His country had often emphasized the importance of enhancing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the safeguards system, and wished to commend the Director General for the 
measures he had taken to that end. Sweden particularly welcomed SAGSI's re-examination 
of safeguards implementation and its proposals for an alternative safeguards regime. 
SAGSI's work was- all the more important given the continuing decline in the level of 
inspection goal attainment indicated in the Safeguards Implementation Report for 1992 
(GOV/2653). The principles for an alternative safeguards system currently being elaborated 
and the measures proposed by S AGSI for the detection of undeclared activities would create 
the necessary confidence and increase cost-effectiveness. 
110. A decision on the proposed measures needed to be taken before 1995. Sweden 
therefore welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to initiate co-operation with Member States in 
studies of the proposals and in field trials. It was already conducting a field trial regarding 
the possibility of detecting undeclared activities, and it was considering co-operation with the 
Agency in other areas. The field trials would be of most use if they could be carried out in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 32 

an adequate number of Member States which had reached various levels of nuclear 
development. It was important to find the means of enabling all interested States to 
participate. His Government hoped that the Director General would continue his efforts in 
that sphere in co-operation with interested Member States. His delegation looked forward 
to discussing the results of forthcoming studies and field trials. 

111. Sweden particularly welcomed the ongoing efforts to establish a comprehensive 
system for reporting exports and imports of nuclear materials and equipment. Refined 
techniques for evaluating information were essential in order to ensure the viability of the 
system. 
112. Sweden was privileged to be co-operating with several newly independent States of 
the former Soviet Union in the development of their nuclear material control systems. His 
country looked forward to continuing its co-operation and welcomed the co-ordination of the 
activities in question with the corresponding Agency activities; that would help to avoid 
duplication and ensure a high level of effectiveness and efficiency. 
113. At the thirty-sixth session of the General Conference, Sweden had urged all Member 
States to work towards rapid completion of the work on a nuclear safety convention. Since 
then, impressive results had been achieved by the Group of Experts and its Chairman. 
Sweden, which believed that the rapid establishment of such a convention was essential, 
would like to see agreement on a final text early in 1994. To that end, together with other 
States it had agreed that the scope of the convention should be limited to civil nuclear power 
reactors, on the understanding that work on preparing a convention on waste management 
would start without delay. Sweden therefore called for preparatory work to begin 
immediately so that negotiations on the convention might take place as soon as agreement had 
been reached on the relevant safety fundamentals. The Director General and the Secretariat 
were to be commended for their ongoing work on waste management safety fundamentals, 
and his delegation looked forward to the speedy completion of that work. 
114. His Government attached a high priority to the work of the Standing Committee on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and looked forward to its early completion so that a diplomatic 
conference could be held as soon as possible in 1994. It was important that the Vienna 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 33 

Convention and the Joint Protocol attract the widest possible adherence. Several States with 
nuclear power plants - and also their neighbouring States - were still not parties to those 
instruments. 

115. Sweden regarded nuclear safety as one of the Agency's priority activities and strongly 
supported safety services such as the OS ART and ASSET services and IPERS and also 
initiatives to strengthen national infrastructures for radiation protection and nuclear safety. 
The Agency's work on nuclear safety and radiation protection in Eastern Europe and 
countries of the former Soviet Union was of particular importance. It was essential to coordinate 
as much as possible the work of all parties, especially as several of the States in 
question had only a few experts available for participation in the activities of the various 
international groups involved. 
116. For its part, the Swedish Government had allocated some 125 million kronor for 
nuclear safety and radiation protection programmes being conducted in co-operation with 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, particularly the Baltic States and the Russian 
Federation. Those programmes had led to considerable improvements in reactor safety and 
radiation protection, and to a better mutual understanding of needs and priorities as regards 
improvements in reactor safety, radiation protection and waste management. Needless to 
say, such progress could not have been achieved without the strenuous efforts of Sweden's 
partners in the co-operative effort. 
117. His delegation welcomed the establishment of the Nuclear Safety Account 
administered by the EBRD, which would provide a good basis for further improvements in 
nuclear safety. The resolving of the nuclear liability issues which he had mentioned earlier 
had proved to be an essential factor in that regard. 
118. His Government considered that the dumping of radioactive waste, in whatever form, 
should be completely prohibited under the Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution 
by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (the so-called London Convention of 1972). His 
Government also wished to see military waste included within the scope of the Convention. 
In that regard, he commended the Agency for the important work it was doing in co

GC(XXXVII)/OR.354 
page 34 

operation with Norway and the Russian Federation within the framework of the International 
Arctic Seas Assessment Project. 

119. Regarding the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities, to which his 
country attached high priority, he noted that demand was strong in the areas of food and 
agriculture, radiation protection, safety of nuclear installations and radioactive waste 
management. It was important that the TACF's resources be predictable and assured. The 
decline in pledges and payments was therefore extremely regrettable, particularly in view of 
the impact in areas such as nuclear safety, waste management and radiation protection. 
Sweden had pledged its share of the TACF target for 1994, and its extrabudgetary 
contributions for technical assistance averaged almost US $1 million annually. Sweden 
considered that the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities were carried out 
in a very competent and efficient manner. As on previous occasions, his delegation 
welcomed the wider co-operation between the Agency and other organizations. 
120. In conclusion, he said that safeguards, nuclear safety and technical assistance were 
all areas of high priority. It went without saying that scarce resources had to be used for 
high priority tasks. He had already indicated those issues which were of most importance 
to his country. Lastly, he complimented the Director General and the Secretariat on the 
work they had done in 1992, a year in which the Agency's performance had once more 
earned it the confidence and gratitude of its Member States. 
The meeting rose at 6.15 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
20 October 1993 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 28 September 1993, at 10.15 a.m. 

President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
Later: Mr. GUTIERREZ LEYTON (Chile) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 

5 Arrangements for the Conference 

(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for 
initial discussion 1-2 7 
(b) Closing date of the session and opening date of the 
next session 28 - 29 

Requests for the restoration of voting rights 30 - 31 

8 General debate and annual report for 1992 
(resumed from meeting 354) 32 - 121 
Statements by the delegates of: 

Argentina 32 - 44 
Belgium 45 - 66 
Russian Federation 67 - 85 
France 86 - 100 
Hungary 101 - 112 
Bangladesh 113 - 121 

Announcement concerning new members of the Agency

 122 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1052, Corr.l and Add.l. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.1. 
93-3747(III) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 2 

ABACC 
ARCAL 

ASSET 
CEC 
CIS 
DPRK 
EBRD 
EURATOM 
G-24 
IPERS 
NDT 
NPT 
OPANAL 

OSART 
PHARE 
PLO 
R&D 
RBMK 
RCA 

SAGSI 
START 
TACF 
TACIS 
Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNDP 
USSR 
Vienna Convention 
World Bank (IBRD) 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 

Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 

Technology in Latin America 

Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 

Commission of the European Communities 

Commonwealth of Independent States 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 

European Atomic Energy Community 

Group of Twenty-Four 

International Peer Review Service 

Non-destructive testing 

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 

Operational Safety Review Team 

Poland, Hungary: assistance for economic reconstruction 

Palestinian Liberation Organization 

Research and development 

High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 

Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 

Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

(for Asia and the Pacific) 

Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 

Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 

Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 

Technical Assistance for the Commonwealth of Independent States 

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 

United Nations Development Programme 

Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 

Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1961) 

International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 

Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 3 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION (GC(XXXVII/1052, Corr.l and Add.l) 
1. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee recommended to the 

General Conference that the agenda for the current session should include all the items listed 
in document GC(XXXVII)/1052, together with the additional item (Implementation of the 
agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the 
application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear 
Weapons) proposed by the Board of Governors in document GC(XXXVII)/1052/Add.1. The 
Committee also recommended that the Conference should consider the latter item before the 
lapse of seven days after its inclusion in the agenda in accordance with Rule 15 of the 
General Conference's Rules of Procedure. 

2. The Committee further recommended that the items listed in the provisional agenda 
be allocated for initial discussion as indicated in documents GC(XXII)/1052 and Corr.l, 
and that the item entitled "Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in connection with 
the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" be considered by the Conference 
in plenary session. 
3. With respect to the order of items, the Committee recommended that the order 
appearing in document GC(XXXVII)/1052 be retained, with the inclusion of the additional 
item as item 23 and consequent renumbering of the subsequent items, on the understanding 
that the new item would be dealt with not earlier than Friday and that the exigencies of the 
moment or the efficient conduct of business might well call for changes to be made both in 
the Plenary and in the Committee of the Whole. In that connection, the Committee 
recommended that the Conference take up item 7 (Approval of the appointment of the 
Director General) at the beginning of the meeting that afternoon. 
4. Mr. LI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), noting that the adoption by 
the Board of Governors of the resolution to place on the agenda of the present session of the 
General Conference the item entitled "Implementation of the agreement between the Agency 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 4 

and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in 
connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" was a violation 
of his country's sovereignty, said that his delegation reiterated its strong opposition to the 
inclusion of that item in the General Conference's agenda. 

5. Both the United States, which had threatened the DPRK with nuclear weapons, and 
certain officials of the Agency's Secretariat, who - acting on the basis of intelligence 
information fabricated by a third country - had attempted to force a special inspection upon 
his country, were responsible for the present complexity of the issue. There were in fact 
sinister political motives behind the attempt to add the item in question to the Conference's 
agenda. 
6. The question of Agency inspections in the DPRK was a matter to be resolved by the 
parties concerned and it was not appropriate to place it on the General Conference's agenda. 
Moreover, at the present time, when talks and consultations between the parties concerned 
appeared to be progressing towards a possible resolution of the issue, its referral to the 
General Conference would block the progress made and make the situation more 
complicated. 
7. In any case, there was no reason to add the item, since both the 5 MW research 
reactor and the radiochemical laboratory, about which some countries had suspicions, were 
under Agency safeguards. In August 1993, the Agency inspection team had confirmed that 
reprocessing had not taken place at the radiochemical laboratory, thus proving that nuclear 
material was not being used for other purposes. Furthermore, despite the unique and 
extraordinary circumstances associated with the temporary suspension of the effectuation of 
his country's announced withdrawal from the NPT, continuity of safeguards information from 
surveillance equipment had been maintained, a fact which the United States had noted with 
satisfaction. 
8. Moreover, according to Rule 15 of the General Conference's Rules of Procedure, 
no additional item could be considered until seven days after being placed on the agenda and 
there was no justification for waiving that requirement. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 5 

9. In conclusion, he said that the issue should be resolved through dialogue and 
negotiation and, reiterating his delegation's strong opposition to the referral of the matter to 

the General Conference, requested that a roll-call vote be taken. 

10. The PRESIDENT suggested that, leaving aside for the time being the question 
of the inclusion of the additional item, the General Conference accept all the other 

recommendations of the General Committee. 

11. It was so agreed. 
12. The PRESIDENT, complying with the request of the representative of the 
DPRK, proposed that the General Conference proceed with a roll-call vote on the proposed 

inclusion of the additional agenda item. 

13. Peru, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
14. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Republic 
of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, 
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri 
Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America, 
Venezuela. 

Against: Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 

Abstaining: China, Cuba, Holy See, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Namibia, 
Pakistan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, 
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe. 

15. There were 69 votes in favour and one against, with ten abstentions. The item 
entitled "Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 6 

Republic of Korea for the application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the 

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons" was therefore included in the agenda. 

16. The PRESIDENT, complying with the request of the representative of the 
DPRK, proposed that the General Conference proceed with a roll-call vote on the proposal 

to waive the requirement of Rule 15 of the General Conference's Rules of Procedure that 

seven days should elapse after the inclusion of an additional item in the agenda before that 

item could be considered. 

17. The Syrian Arab Republic, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called 
upon to vote first. 

18. 
In favour: Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, 
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Republic 
of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, 
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab 
Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela. 
Against: Democratic People's Republic of Korea. 

Abstaining: China, Cuba, Holy See, Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Namibia, 
Pakistan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic of Tanzania, 
Viet Nam, Zimbabwe. 

19. There were 69 votes in favour and one against, with ten abstentions. The proposal 
was adopted. 

20. Ms. KSENTINI (Algeria) said that her delegation had voted in favour of the 
inclusion of the new agenda item and the suspension of the required lapse of seven days prior 

to consideration of that additional item in line with her country's consistent policy of 

promoting the democratic debate of the plenary bodies of all international organizations. 

Since all Member States were represented in those plenary bodies, it was proper that all 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 7 

important issues should be discussed in such forums. Furthermore, since the title of the 
agenda item was factual, it would not prejudice the nature of the debate or any decision that 
the General Conference might take after objective and responsible consideration of the efforts 
being made. The Board of Governors had judged it appropriate to bring the debate on that 
issue to the plenary body of the General Conference. Although the political expediency of 
the inclusion of that item remained to be seen, her delegation would abide by the collective 
wisdom and it hoped that the present meetings would make a constructive contribution to the 
solution of a very sensitive problem that had been before the Board of Governors for the past 
eight months. 

21. Mr. CHEN (China) recalled that the agenda for the General Conference had 
already been adopted by the Board of Governors in June in accordance with the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference. The agenda had been formally circulated on 25 June 
and any additional item should have been submitted in time in accordance with the proper 
procedures. 
22. There was no doubt that the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and the DPRK was a very important issue, but there was no need for it suddenly to 
be treated as urgent. His delegation could not understand the reason behind the proposal to 
waive the required time lapse and hastily include the item on the General Conference's 
agenda. His delegation was also concerned about the possible negative consequences of that 
unusual action. 
23. In the past few months, as a result of the joint efforts of the parties concerned, some 
positive developments had taken place and the tense atmosphere of conflict had somewhat 
improved. The two rounds of talks between the DPRK and the United States had led to some 
initial progress. The DPRK had announced its decision to suspend temporarily effectuation 
of its withdrawal from the NPT and consultations had also taken place between the Agency 
and the DPRK. The two parties had found a basic solution to the procedural issue 
concerning the second round of consultations, and it seemed likely that the remaining 
problems could be solved through further negotiations. It was important to create and 
maintain an atmosphere conducive to finding a solution to the issue. All parties should 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 8 

therefore be encouraged to continue their contacts, dialogue and consultations so that further 
progress could be made. 

24. The sole purpose of adding the item to the agenda, contrary to normal practice, was 
to arouse public opinion and exert pressure. Instead of helping to resolve the situation, it 
would only impede the subsequent consultations between the parties concerned. 
Furthermore, it seemed likely that as a result the Agency would be unable to continue its 
routine inspections in the DPRK, and it would thus lose continuity of inspection materials 
and data. 
25. Lessons should be drawn from the past in order to avoid repeating mistakes in the 
future. If all parties concerned took a flexible attitude and participated in a dialogue based 
on mutual understanding and equality, there was no major international issue that could not 
be resolved. If too much pressure was applied and unrealistic preconditions were put 
forward, then the problem would become more complicated and the conflict exacerbated. 
The correct approach was to find a solution through direct bilateral consultations among the 
parties concerned - in the present case, the DPRK, the United States, the Republic of Korea 
and the Agency. At the same time, a comprehensive solution could not be expected to 
emerge from just one or two rounds of consultations and all parties should therefore 
demonstrate their sincerity, flexibility and patience. 
26. In view of those considerations, the Chinese delegation had abstained in the votes 
which had just taken place. 
27. Mr. BAKSHI (India) said that his delegation had always maintained that all 
difficulties and problems in the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and the DPRK could and should be resolved through consultations and discussions 
and that everything should be done to encourage that process. However, the current situation 
had generated considerable concern and many delegations believed that it was important to 
refer the matter to the General Conference for discussion and that the guidance of the 
Conference would be useful to the parties concerned. His delegation had therefore voted in 
favour of both motions and sincerely hoped that the forthcoming debate would make a 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 9 

positive contribution to the common objective of resolving all issues through dialogue and 
discussions. 

(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT 
SESSION 
28. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended to the 
General Conference that Friday, 1 October 1993, be set as the closing date of the thirtyseventh 
regular session and Monday, 19 September 1994, as the opening date of the thirtyeighth 
regular session of the General Conference, which would be held in Vienna. 
29. 
The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 
REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXVII)/INF/326 
and 329) 

30. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had received requests from 
Iraq and Afghanistan that the last sentence of Article XIX. A of the Statute be invoked in 
order that they might be permitted to vote during the present session of the General 
Conference. The General Committee recommended that the General Conference reject both 
requests. 
31. 
The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (resumed 
from meeting 354) 

32. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said he wished first to extend a warm welcome 
to the new Member States of the Agency: the Slovak Republic, the Czech Republic, and the 
Republics of Armenia, Kazakhstan and the Marshall Islands, and the former Yogoslav 
Republic of Macedonia. 
33. In the past year, Argentina and Brazil had continued to implement the common system 
of accounting and control of nuclear materials, which was now fully established and 
functional. A second important element of his country's recent nuclear policy had been the 
establishment in June 1992 of the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials (ABACC), following on from the agreement for the exclusively peaceful 
use of nuclear energy signed by both countries in July 1991 in Guadalajara, Mexico. Under 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 10 

the terms established by the common system of accounting and control of nuclear materials, 
the national authorities of both countries had provided the ABACC with initial inventories 
of all the nuclear material at their nuclear facilities. 

34. Inspections to verify those initial inventories had started in March, and by the end of 
April some 15% of the work had been completed in Brazil and some 20% in Argentina; it 
was hoped that by the end of the year the process would be complete for all material not 
subject to Agency safeguards. Thus, by the beginning of 1994, all the nuclear material in 
every nuclear facility in Argentina and Brazil would have been placed under the safeguards 
of either the Agency or the ABACC. In addition, the Secretariat of the ABACC had 
received design information questionnaires for all the nuclear facilities in the two countries 
which had not been placed under Agency safeguards. By the end of April, the ABACC had 
received 80% and verified 68% of the questionnaires, enabling it to produce, jointly with the 
national authorities, manuals of inspection procedures or facility attachments for each facility. 
35. The comprehensive safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the ABACC and 
the Agency had already been ratified by the Argentine Parliament. A number of meetings 
had also been held with the Agency to discuss the general section of the subsidiary 
arrangements for that agreement and it was expected that those arrangements would soon be 
settled. 
36. At its meeting in May 1993, OPANAL, following a request from the Governments 
of Argentina, Brazil and Chile, had decided to hold an extraordinary meeting at the end of 
the year to examine the financial and other conditions regulating the participation of those 
three countries in OPANAL. It was to be hoped that the process of ratifying the Tlatelolco 
Treaty would be completed by the end of that meeting. The amended Tlatelolco Treaty had 
already been approved by consensus in the Argentine Senate and endorsed by the Foreign 
Relations and Defence Committees of the House of Deputies. The whole House was 
expected to approve the Treaty shortly. 
37. Furthermore, the Argentine Government had recently issued two decrees to establish 
a system for strict control of the export of equipment, material and sensitive technology in 
a number of areas related to the production of weapons of mass destruction, including the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 11 

nuclear field. That system was now fully operational. There had been a number of other 
related developments, including Agentina's application to join the Nuclear Suppliers Group 
and formal signing by the Argentine Government of a memorandum of understanding with 
the United States covering exports of sensitive material . 

38. Turning to the status of nuclear activities in Argentina, he observed that nuclear 
energy continued to play a major role in electricity production. In 1992 the Atucha I and 
Embalse power plants had contributed 14.78% of the total electricity produced by the 
national grid, in spite of the fact that those plants represented only 7.4% of the installed 
capacity. In the first half of the year, virtually the same excellent output had been 
maintained despite strong competition from the hydroelectric power sector, which enjoyed 
a privileged position in Argentina. Work on the Atucha n plant was nearing completion, 
after many delays caused by the economic difficulties of the past few years. Connection to 
the grid was now predicted for early 1997 at the latest. Another project held up by past 
economic constraints was the industrial heavy water plant at Arroyito. The plant, which had 
an annual capacity of 200 tonnes, was undergoing final pre-commissioning tests and it was 
hoped that commercial production would begin by the end of 1993. Another, no less 
important development was that Argentina now had a cyclotron at an advanced stage of 
construction, which would be used to produce short- and medium-lived radioisotopes, of 
which there had hitherto been such a shortage in Argentina. Production would commence 
by the end of the year and would greatly benefit the health and well-being of the population. 
39. In the field of international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, the 
year had been a very active one for Argentina on both the multilateral and bilateral fronts. 
Under the Agency's technical co-operation programme in general, and under the ARCAL 
programme in particular, Argentina had hosted training courses and workshops; had 
provided training for visiting scientists and fellows from other countries; and in 1992 had 
occupied fourth place of all Member States in supplying experts and lecturers. Within the 
framework of the Organization of American States, Argentina continued to provide 
fellowships to students from Latin America for courses held in Argentina. In addition, 
Argentina had agreements on bilateral co-operation with a number of countries, including 
Germany, Brazil, France and Uruguay. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 12 

40. The Secretariat had made commendable efforts to optimize the use of its scarce 
resources in implementing the Agency's technical assistance activities over the past year. 
For its part, his Government had paid its contribution to the TACF for 1993 well in advance, 
and would be pledging a contribution for 1994 of US $300 000, which it would pay as soon 
as possible. 
41. With regard to Agency safeguards, his Government fully supported the steps being 
taken by the Agency to strengthen the safeguards system within the framework of the Statute 
and existing safeguards agreements. Nevertheless, it believed that the Secretariat should 
redouble its efforts to maintain confidence in the system by rationalizing its implementation 
approaches so that the budget did not become overburdened. 
42. His Government attached great importance to the completion of the work to prepare 
a nuclear safety convention. However, it was concerned at the lack of progress made by the 
group of experts. The conclusion of the convention was an essential prerequisite to gaining 
wide public acceptance of nuclear energy. For that reason, he urged Member States which 
had adopted a more rigid approach during the group's work to show more flexibility with a 
view to facilitating a speedy and acceptable consensus. 
43. The Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage had made significant 
progress in evaluating a number of the issues involved. Again, however, he felt bound to 
express his concern at the uncompromising positions adopted by a small number of Member 
States with regard to certain conflicting aspects. His delegation also urged those States to 
show more flexibility, and hoped that a diplomatic conference could soon be held to discuss 
amendments to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and also, if 
possible, a new convention on supplementary compensation. 
44. With those comments, his delegation could approve the Annual Report for 1992 and, 
in conclusion, wished to congratulate the Director General on his reappointment, commend 
the Secretariat for its dedication and professionalism, and pledge Argentina's continued full 
support and active participation in the Agency's work. 
45. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the European Community 
and its member States, said that the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was an area in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 13 

which the international community and the Agency had had to face up to significant 
developments over the past year. The most serious problem had been the nonimplementation 
of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the Democratic 
People's Republic of Korea. The European Community was deeply concerned that, despite 
the patience shown by the international community, the DPRK had still not complied with 
the commitments it had undertaken. The members of the Community called on that country 
to reaffirm its unconditional adherence to the NPT, to apply fully and in good faith the 
comprehensive safeguards agreement that it had signed on 20 January 1992, and to accept 
the inspection of the two sites designated by the Agency. 

46. The European Community deeply deplored the fact that during its recent consultations 
with the Agency, the DPRK had shown no willingness to honour its commitments: instead, 
it was seeking to limit the scope of the consultations and to impose conditions upon them. 
Such moves were unacceptable. The members of the Community hoped, nevertheless, that 
the consultations could resume without preconditions and in a constructive spirit. 
47. The Community thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the diligence, 
professional competence and impartiality that they had shown in that delicate period and 
requested them to pursue their efforts with vigour. The Director General was likewise 
requested to keep the Security Council and Member States of the Agency informed of any 
important developments in that area. The Community hoped that the dialogue between the 
DPRK and the Republic of Korea would be resumed, thereby facilitating the establishment 
in the near future of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the Korean Peninsula, in conformity with 
the joint statement signed on 31 December 1991. 
48. With regard to the situation in the former Soviet Union, the member States of the 
European Community naturally welcomed the accession to the NPT of Armenia, Azerbaijan, 
Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Uzbekistan and the Secretariat's efforts to prepare 
for the application of safeguards in other States of the former USSR. They called on those 
other States, particularly Ukraine and Kazakhstan, to accede to the NPT as non-nuclearweapon 
States without delay and hoped that the agreement between Russia and Ukraine on 
3 September 1993 relating to the return to Russia of the nuclear warheads located in Ukraine 
would be implemented very soon. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 14 

49. Another subject of great concern was the situation in Iraq. The member States of the 
European Community regretted that, by refusing to transmit to the Agency the list of its 
suppliers, Iraq had still not applied fully the provisions of Security Council resolutions 687 
and 707. They encouraged Iraq to provide the Agency with all the information relating to 
its nuclear programme that had not yet been communicated and requested the Director 
General to implement as rapidly as possible the provisions on the long-term monitoring plan 
provided for by Security Council resolution 715, while pursuing, as envisaged in Security 
Council resolution 687, the search for components of Iraq's clandestine programme that had 
not yet been uncovered. 
50. Another significant development in the area of non-proliferation was the South African 
Government's acknowledgement of the fact that nuclear explosive devices had been 
developed there in the 1980s and had been dismantled before the country had acceded to the 
NPT. The Community members welcomed that openness, which revealed that a country 
could take an independent decision to renounce a clandestine nuclear programme. They had 
noted the Director General's report concerning the Agency's verification activities in South 
Africa, and welcomed the progress made during the past year in the negotiations to establish 
a denuclearized zone in Africa. 
51. The rapid progress made in the peace process in the Middle East was encouraging. 
Recent developments justified the hope that the requirements for the establishment of a 
denuclearized zone in that region and for the application of comprehensive safeguards in the 
Middle East might soon be met. 
52. The European Community hoped that the ratification of the quadripartite agreement 
signed by Brazil, Argentina, the ABACC and the Agency would be completed rapidly. 
53. Lastly, on the subject of non-proliferation, he said the European Community 
welcomed the recent accessions to the NPT and strongly urged all countries that had not yet 
done so to accede to the NPT without delay and to sign a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. The Twelve recalled their commitment to the unconditional 
extension of the NPT for an indefinite period, a commitment that had been reaffirmed at the 
first session of the Preparatory Committee held in New York in May 1993. Was it necessary 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 15 

to stress that the NPT was the only worldwide framework for preventing the spread of 
nuclear weapons? 

54. In August 1993, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva had adopted by consensus 
a decision giving the Ad Hoc Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban a mandate to negotiate a 
comprehensive test ban treaty. Multilateral negotiations were to be launched with a view to 
developing a treaty of universal application comprising an effective verification regime. The 
European Community members welcomed with satisfaction that decisive step, which would 
contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
55. The Twelve were pleased that the proposals they had made two years previously to 
strengthen the Agency's safeguards system had been adopted by the Board of Governors and 
that the necessary steps for implementing those proposals were being taken. If the Secretariat 
was to be able to acquire an overall view of the transport and production of nuclear materials 
throughout the world, it was essential that all countries should take part in the system for 
reporting of exports and imports of nuclear material and of exports of certain equipment and 
non-nuclear material. 
56. The study carried out by SAGSI on strengthening the effectiveness and improving the 
efficiency of the safeguards system had given the Secretariat a useful foundation for a more 
in-depth revision of the safeguards system. The purpose of the exercise was to improve the 
detection of anomalies that revealed clandestine activities, even if it was hard to imagine that 
the Agency would one day be capable of certifying absolutely the absence of clandestine 
activities worldwide. 
57. While the need to reduce the cost of inspection missions should not be 
underestimated, that requirement should not be allowed to impair the elaboration of a 
coherent project that might offer prospects for comprehensive effectiveness of Agency 
safeguards, while taking into account the very real dangers of proliferation. 
58. The European Community had listened with great interest to the Director General's 
report on measures undertaken to strengthen the effectiveness and improve the efficiency of 
the safeguards system, and were awaiting with interest the specific proposals he would make 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 16 

at the December meeting of the Board of Governors on the basis of SAGSI's conclusions and 
the discussions within the Board of Governors in June 1993. 

59. The negotiations on a partnership approach between the Agency's inspection units and 
EURATOM had made substantial progress during the past year. The increased co-operation 
had already had favourable effects on the Agency's budget, yet the benefits expected from 
the agreement remained subject to a number of conditions. The Director General should 
continue with the discussions with a view to ensuring that the partnership approach was fully 
implemented in the near future. One of the most important developments had been 
EURATOM's confirmation as a regional safeguards system for preventing the diversion of 
nuclear material towards objectives other than those declared by member States of the 
Community. The status of a regional safeguards system could be granted to other regional 
institutions under certain clearly defined conditions. The European Community had 
accordingly requested the Director General to study and submit to the Board of Governors 
a document on the conditions a regional organization must fulfil in order to negotiate a 
partnership agreement with the Agency. 
60. The member States of the European Community were deeply committed to the control 
of nuclear exports, and particularly to the guidelines adopted by the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group. They appealed to the suppliers that had not yet adhered to the guidelines for export 
controls to do so as soon as possible. All members of the Nuclear Suppliers Group had 
resolved to demand the application of the Agency's comprehensive safeguards to all nuclear 
activities, present as well as future, as a precondition for any new and significant supplies 
to non-nuclear-weapon States. 
61. Turning to the fields of nuclear safety, radiation protection and technical co-operation, 
he noted that the benefits of the Agency's activities in areas where nuclear technology was 
not used for energy purposes were often underestimated. In the area of nuclear safety, the 
Agency played a role of primary importance. The European Community welcomed the 
progress made by the group of experts in elaborating a nuclear safety convention and 
believed such an instrument would improve nuclear safety worldwide, as well as the 
coherence of fundamental safety principles. That was why it called on all States, particularly 
those with nuclear reactors in their territories, to participate actively in the elaboration of the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 17 

convention. A consensus seemed to be emerging in favour of initially limiting the scope of 
application of the convention to power reactors and it should be possible for the text of the 
convention to be finalized at a diplomatic conference early in 1994. 

62. It was to be hoped that the present session of the General Conference would provide 
the opportunity for the international community to express its desire, following approval by 
the Board of Governors of the fundamental principles relating to radioactive waste 
management, to initiate negotiations with a view to elaborating an international legal 
framework for the management of radioactive waste. It was also to be hoped that, as an 
international consensus on fundamental safety principles emerged, other aspects of the fuel 
cycle would likewise be covered by appropriate international instruments. The Community 
attached great importance to nuclear safety in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe 
and the former USSR, and had made substantial contributions in that area within the 
Community, within the Agency and within the Group of 24. The Agency played an 
important role in improving nuclear safety in the States of Eastern Europe and the former 
USSR. Furthermore, its OS ART and ASSET missions and the programmes on reactors that 
presented problems continued to provide useful information for the activities of the Group 
of 24. Recent initiatives, such as the joint IAEA/UNDP initiative aimed at strengthening 
radiation protection and nuclear safety infrastructures in countries of the former USSR, and 
the International Arctic Seas Assessment Programme, supplemented the Agency's 
commitment to the improvement of nuclear safety. 
63. For some time the Agency's Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage 
had been involved in revision of the Vienna Convention and in the preparation of a new 
convention on supplementary compensation. Significant results had been achieved and the 
Community hoped that a diplomatic conference could be convened as soon as possible to 
finalize the two conventions. 
64. The European Community considered technical assistance to be one of the Agency's 
essential tasks and believed that all States should have access to the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy, be it for medical, agriculture, industrial or energy purposes. The Agency 
had a fundamental role to play in accelerating that process and enabling nuclear activities to 
be pursued in conformity with the highest level of safety and radiation protection. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 18 

65. The Community found it regrettable that, as in the preceding year, they had to express 
their concern about the Agency's financial situation. In the interests of the proper 
functioning of the organization, the Twelve called on all Member States to pay their 
contributions to the Agency's budget in good time. They welcomed the efforts made by the 
Director General and his staff to provide for the Agency's operations in very difficult 
circumstances and appreciated all the more the Secretariat's recent exercise aimed at more 
advanced analysis of the efficiency of Agency programmes. 
66. In conformity with the Statute, the General Conference would be called upon to 
endorse the decision of the Board of Governors to renew the term of office for the Director 
General for an additional four years. The members of the Community had been deeply 
gratified by the decision of the Board of Governors to renew the Director General's term of 
office. They were very grateful to the Director General for the activities he had carried out 
in the past and expressed their warmest wishes for the years to come, which would be 
decisive, particularly for the future of non-proliferation. 
Mr. Gutierrez Leyton (Chile) took the Chair. 

67. Mr. MIKHAILOV (Russian Federation) extended a warm welcome to the new 
Members of the Agency and noted that, with the move away from the Cold War, partnership 
was taking the place of confrontation and political solutions were increasingly recognized as 
the only acceptable means of solving old and new conflicts. The Agency was quite rightly 
taking a leading role in the search for solutions to the world community's problems in 
meeting its growing energy needs, while providing an assurance that all efforts would be 
directed to peaceful aims. 
68. His delegation attached great importance to further strengthening of the international 
non-proliferation regime and particularly the NPT. The Treaty had proved its effectiveness 
in limiting nuclear weapons and had a positive influence on international political stability. 
His delegation trusted that the participants at the 1995 NPT Conference would decide on its 
unlimited extension and make it a truly universal international legal document. Meanwhile, 
the number of accessions to the NPT continued to increase and he welcomed Belarus and 
Armenia among the new signatories. He hoped that the other countries of the CIS, 
particularly Ukraine and Kazakhstan, would join the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 19 

the near future and that they would soon place all their nuclear activities under Agency 
safeguards. 

69. At the same time, the Treaty was being tested in new ways. The DPRK had caused 
great concern in the world community by deciding to withdraw from the NPT. The 
suspension of that decision had been a step in the right direction, but a full review of that 
decision should take place and the necessary measures taken to ensure that the Agency could 
continue its safeguards activities in accordance with the DPRK's safeguards agreement. 
70. Fundamental changes were taking place in the international situation, with growing 
confidence between the nuclear-weapon States leading not only to agreements on a significant 
reduction in nuclear weapons and arsenals, but also to qualitatively new steps being taken in 
the direction of nuclear disarmament. In line with Russia's support for a universal nuclear 
test ban, President Yeltsin had decided to extend the period of the Russian moratorium on 
nuclear tests for as long as it was observed by the other nuclear Powers. Every effort should 
be made to take advantage of the present conditions, which were uniquely favourable, in 
order to develop and conclude a verifiable comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty as soon as 
possible. 
71. Real progress had been made in nuclear disarmament, with tens of thousands of 
nuclear warheads being dismantled. The resulting significant quantities of nuclear materials, 
including highly enriched uranium and plutonium, raised further questions and contributed 
to current discussions about the plutonium obtained in the reprocessing of spent fuel from 
nuclear power plants. The materials resulting from the elimination of nuclear stockpiles 
should be used for constructive purposes as far as possible. There was much potential in 
Russia for the use of such materials in priority areas such as nuclear power generation, 
improving nuclear power plant safety, solving ecological problems and supporting economic 
reforms. The highly enriched uranium could be used for the fabrication of fuel for nuclear 
power plants, while the plutonium obtained presented a unique chance for starting a largescale 
nuclear energy programme in the twenty-first century. The experience Russia had 
acquired in setting up fast neutron reactors and the research carried out in recent years 
showed that a solution might be found to strategic energy problems, such as the gradual 
phasing-out of fossil fuels, fundamental action on ecological problems, as formulated by the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 20 

United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, and the burning of actinides 
and gradual development of a fuel cycle which did not disturb the radiation balance of the 
planet. The Agency should play a co-ordinating role in such activities. 

72. Russia attached particular importance to the Agency's efforts to improve still further 
its monitoring activities and the safeguards system. Agency safeguards were an effective 
international mechanism for building confidence. They helped provide appropriate conditions 
for developing co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It was important that the 
Agency should be able to rely on the firm support of the world community. For its part, his 
country would continue to support the constant enhancement of safeguards effectiveness and 
the Agency's right to conduct special inspections. At present, the Agency's inspection efforts 
were directed to the declared peaceful nuclear activities of States. However, experience of 
the past few years had shown that there should also be some means of detecting undeclared 
nuclear activities and particularly any attempts to manufacture nuclear weapons secretly. 
New methods, which could include ecological monitoring, would be necessary. Russia had 
experience in that field and was ready to co-operate. 
73. The Agency was currently working to verify that South Africa's nuclear-weapons 
programme had been completely dismantled. It was the first time that the Agency had been 
given a mandate to verify nuclear disarmament and the termination of a nuclear-weapons 
programme. It was important to receive exhaustive answers to all questions that arose. His 
country was satisfied with the co-operation between South Africa and the Agency and the 
spirit of openness demonstrated. Experience had shown that if such tasks were to be carried 
out successfully, it was important to involve specialists from Member States with knowledge 
of nuclear weapons. The Agency could continue to count on assistance from Russian 
specialists. 
74. His country was actively co-operating with the Agency in the field of nuclear power. 
A concept had been developed for energy policy in the new economic conditions in Russia. 
Nuclear power played an essential role and its place in the energy balance was currently 
being clarified and ways of developing it were being studied. Definite long-term goals 
should be set, as well as priorities for the short- and medium-term future. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 21 

75. At the beginning of 1992, the share of energy production from thermal power plants 
using fossil fuels was approximately 70%, from hydroelectric power plants - 16%, and from 
nuclear power plants - 12%. Most of the energy production at thermal plants (60%) was 
based on natural gas. Twenty-nine units were in industrial operation at nine nuclear power 
plants with a total installed capacity of over 21 000 MW. The last unit to be brought into 
operation was at the Balakovo plant in April 1993 with a power of 1000 MW. By the year 
2030 the contribution of nuclear power sources to electricity production would increase from 
the present 20 % to 30 % in the country as a whole and from 25 % to 40-50 % in the European 
part. 
76. The next generation of nuclear power plants would probably consist mainly of WWER 
plants, thereby drawing on Russia's positive experience in that area and its existing scientific 
and industrial resources, complemented by international experience and co-operation. 
77. Russia had also acquired unique experience with channel-type reactors, which had a 
number of advantages in terms of future safety specifications, particularly for the planned 
replacement of RBMK-type reactors at existing sites. Prototype nuclear power plants would 
be developed and installed in Russia using new technologies as the basis for the development 
of nuclear power in the twenty-first century. 
78. The Agency's activities relating to water desalination were having a beneficial impact 
on the development of some countries. Russia had proposed the setting up of a 
demonstration floating desalination facility under the aegis of the Agency. Russia's 
experience could also be useful in the establishment of small-scale power reactors for the 
production of potable water. 
79. Priority should be given to co-ordinated activities at international level to ensure the 
safety of nuclear power. When finalized, the international convention on nuclear safety 
should make a significant contribution to those efforts, although the drafting process was 
taking an unnecessarily long time. It was to be hoped that once agreement had been reached 
on the scope of the convention's application, the work would speed up. 
80. The Agency's extrabudgetary programme for providing assistance to the countries of 
Eastern Europe and the CIS to improve the safety of their nuclear power plants had been 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 22 

very useful and his country was grateful to the donor countries involved. General 
understanding had been reached on questions of technical safety of the first generation of 
reactors and countries operating those power plants were starting to take practical measures 
to improve safety on the basis of the Agency's analysis. In 1992 a satisfactory start had been 
made on projects for the safety analysis of nuclear plants with WWER-1000 and RBMK 
reactors. More than one hundred groups of specialists from various countries had visited 
Russian nuclear power plants over the past year. 

81. After more than two years of negotiations with the CEC on the improvement of the 
safety of Russian nuclear power plants, an extensive programme had been agreed, which 
included the following basic areas for technical co-operation: increasing the safety of 
individual design features for nuclear power plants with reactors of basic design; 
improvement of personnel training; the nuclear fuel cycle; and support for the Russian 
regulatory body. Unfortunately, there had been significant delays in implementation of the 
programme and work was only just starting on the measures planned for 1991. There had 
also been intensive bilateral co-operation between Russia and a number of countries in the 
field of nuclear safety. In return for those efforts, Russia was willing to provide its partners 
with access to its priority nuclear technologies. 
82. The Russian Federation attached great importance to establishing co-operation in the 
field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, particularly with the countries of the CIS and 
an agreement on basic co-operation principles had been concluded in Minsk in June 1992. 
Under that agreement, Russia would provide technical co-operation to Armenia in continuing 
the recommissioning of its nuclear power plant, and would also fulfil its obligations 
concerning spent fuel and deliveries of fresh nuclear fuel for plants in countries of the CIS 
and in Eastern Europe. 
83. Multilateral co-operation between the Agency, Russia and the new States of the CIS 
could be successful if based on a common understanding by the States of the CIS of the value 
of nuclear power applications, and nuclear and isotope technologies to the economy, a desire 
to co-operate in improving nuclear safety and an understanding of their responsibility to the 
international community for solving the associated problems, including the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons, ecological problems and nuclear and radiation safety. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 23 

84. Russia would continue to support the Agency, which had successfully carried out its 
important tasks in the field of safeguards, in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and in the provision of technical assistance. The temporary financial difficulties 
which had led to a delay in the payment of Russia's contributions to the Agency's Regular 
Budget would be overcome and the necessary measures taken for gradual payment of the 
outstanding amounts. 
85. In conclusion, the Russian delegation approved the Annual Report for 1992 and 
supported the Board's recommendation for the Director General's reappointment for another 
four-year period. 
86. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France), after welcoming the new Members of the 
Agency, pointed out that it was not as straightforward as usual to sum up the events of the 
past year. On the one hand, substantial progress had been made in two regions of prime 
importance in the Agency's discussions: the Middle East and the CIS. On the other hand, 
the problem posed by the DPRK, to which the Agency had had to devote considerable time 
and effort during the past year, had been added to the concerns which the Agency already 
had with respect to Iraq. 
87. On the positive side, there was reason to rejoice at the decisive step that had been 
made towards the end of conflict in the Middle East. The mutual recognition by Israel and 
the PLO was an event of very great importance, not only for the security of the region, but 
also for peace in the world. It was to be hoped that the discussions at the General 
Conference on safeguards in the Middle East and the establishment of a zone free from 
weapons of mass destruction would profit from that major event. 
88. After the accession to the NPT of Belarus, Kazakhstan had announced its intention 
to accede to that Treaty. Agreements recently signed by Russia and Ukraine had confirmed 
the desire of those two countries to continue their efforts aimed at the reduction and 
dismantling of nuclear weapons. Ukraine had also demonstrated its willingness to become 
a party to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State. It was to be hoped that those agreements 
would be confirmed and ratified as soon as possible, thus opening up the way for Ukraine's 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 24 

accession to the NPT and ratification of START-1. Russia now envisaged international 
control of the fissile materials resulting from the dismantling of the weapons. 

89. In Latin America, the progress during the last few years towards ratification of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty seemed to be about to bear fruit. The quadripartite agreement between 
Brazil, Argentina, the ABACC and the Agency was also due to be ratified very soon by 
Brazil and should then be able to enter into force without further delay. 
90. In Africa, the draft treaty on the denuclearization of the African continent had now 
been finalized and was expected to be submitted shortly to the United Nations General 
Assembly. The traditional importance of France's links with many countries in the African 
continent meant that it was following that development with both interest and sympathy. 
91. On the other hand, there were reasons for concern. The Iraqi question had not been 
settled: grey areas still existed in the nuclear programme, the long-term monitoring plan was 
very difficult to implement fully, and the lists of suppliers had still not been made available 
by Iraq. There should, therefore, be no weakening of the international community's 
determination. At a time when major developments were taking place in the peace process 
in the Middle East, there should be no question of compromising it by relaxing vigilance in 
the case of a country which, only three years ago, had provoked a serious conflict. 
92. New causes for concern had come from the Far East. Despite the Agency's patience, 
the Director General's undisputed openness to discussion, the Board of Governors' 
determination and the efforts of all concerned, the situation was still very unsatisfactory with 
respect to the Agency's inspections and with respect to the implementation of the agreement 
between the two Koreas. While diplomatic efforts on the part of the United States had 
persuaded the DPRK to suspend its withdrawal from the NPT, it would be disappointing if 
the suspension announced last June enabled neither the special inspection requested in 
February nor even the simple routine inspections to be carried out. The DPRK should 
definitively retract its intention to withdraw from the NPT and should honour all its 
international commitments in the area of non-proliferation. 
93. The credibility of the Agency and of international safeguards was at stake in the case 
of the DPRK, as it had been and still was in the case of Iraq. The international community 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 25 

had to show, especially at a time when various non-proliferation regimes were being 
strengthened, that a country could not refuse to comply with its international commitments 
with impunity. 

94. Active preparations were being made for the NPT Extension Conference and current 
developments clearly showed that the question of the Treaty's extension affected all States 
Parties. Indeed, the stabilization of Africa with South Africa's renunciation of its nuclear 
capability and the draft treaty on the denuclearization of the continent would not have been 
possible without the NPT. The continuation of the peace process in the Middle East would 
make it possible to move decisively towards the verifiable renunciation of all programmes 
of weapons of mass destruction, with the NPT playing a leading role. Lastly, in Asia, the 
problem of the DPRK demonstrated the importance of complying with the terms of the 
Treaty, and the immediate destabilizing effect of the announcement by one country in the 
region of its intention to withdraw from the Treaty. 
95. There had also been important developments in the field of safety. Real progress had 
been made on the drafting of an international safety convention. France had actively 
participated in that work within the group of international experts and hoped that those efforts 
would soon be successfully completed. France favoured a pragmatic approach whereby 
priority was given to power reactors, without however neglecting other nuclear activities 
which still required attention. It was to be hoped that the first draft, which would be 
submitted by the group of experts in the autumn, would meet with broad consensus so that 
the diplomatic conference could be convened at the beginning of 1994 if possible. 
96. The safety of nuclear power plants in Central and Eastern Europe still remained a 
priority. The World Bank, the Agency and the EBRD were concluding their studies of the 
structure of the energy industry in Eastern European countries and the associated financial 
requirements. In addition to the major assistance it was providing both to the multilateral 
nuclear safety fund - to which it was the largest contributor - and through its participation 
in financing the European Community's PHARE and TACIS programmes, France had also 
set up, together with Germany, a joint body of experts on nuclear power plant safety. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 26 

97. At a time when many countries were debating their future energy policies, France 
continued to place its faith in the nuclear power option based on advanced technologies and 
broad international co-operation. French and German designers and electrical engineers were 
collaborating on the European Pressurized Water Reactor project to develop the next 
generation of light water reactors. A detailed preliminary design would be begun at the 
beginning of 1994 and construction of the first model was foreseen for 1998. 
98. With regard to fast neutron reactors, French, British and German studies carried out, 
as well as current projections of uranium consumption, showed that that technology was not 
yet sufficiently competitive for development at an industrial level. Nevertheless, breeder 
reactors were still of great interest in view of the difficult energy situation which would have 
to be faced in the more distant future. In the short term, however, France had redirected its 
research efforts in that field towards a reactor concept which would considerably increase the 
consumption of plutonium and minor actinides to help deal with the stocks of plutonium 
resulting from the reprocessing of spent fuel. 
99. The back-end of the fuel cycle was a subject of particular concern to the French 
authorities. Within the framework of the bill on waste passed in 1991 by its parliament, 
France was intensifying research into long-term radioactive waste management. The chief 
research objectives were to reduce the volume of long-lived waste by three-quarters by the 
year 2000, and to reduce their toxicity by a factor of 10 and then by a factor of 100; to 
investigate the separation of minor actinides and long-lived fission products using innovative 
processes; to study incineration of minor actinides and long-lived fission products in 
pressurized water reactors and particularly in optimized fast neutron reactors; and to study 
the long-term behaviour of material in intermediate storage facilities and repositories with 
a view to developing conditioning methods specifically adapted to various radionuclides 
which would guarantee their long-term containment. 
100. In conclusion, recent developments had presented the Agency with new problems. 
It had set about dealing with them efficiently and competently and it now played a vital 
international role in the complementary fields of safety, non-proliferation and the promotion 
of nuclear energy. France was determined to continue its firm support of the Agency's 
activities. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 27 

101. Mr. PUNGOR (Hungary) welcomed the new Members to the Agency and 
expressed his country's wholehearted support for the reappointment of the Director General. 
102. Despite some discouraging signs over the past year, progress had nevertheless been 
made towards attaining the common goal of establishing a genuine universal non-proliferation 
regime. It was gratifying that all the nuclear-weapon States were now party to the NPT and 
to see other important developments which had further strengthened the regime that was so 
vital for the security of the community of nations. That augured well for the forthcoming 
1995 NPT Extension Conference at which his country hoped the Treaty would be extended 
indefinitely. Hungary, a committed supporter of the NPT and its universality, was taking 
an active part in the preparatory work for that Conference. He urged all those States which 
had not yet done so to accede to the Treaty as non-nuclear-weapon States and conclude fullscope 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. 
103. Regrettably, in the preceding year the integrity of the nuclear non-proliferation regime 
had continued to be challenged. Hungary had consistently supported the Agency's activities 
to implement the United Nations Security Council resolutions on Iraq's non-compliance with 
its safeguards obligations and commended the Secretariat's excellent work in that regard. 
He reiterated his Government's serious concern about the lack of progress in the 
implementation of the safeguards agreement between the DPRK and the Agency. The DPRK 
should fulfil its obligations under the NPT and heed the world community's call for full 
transparency of all its nuclear activities in order to provide assurances about the peaceful 
nature of its nuclear programme. 
104. The Agency's safeguards system had always played a central role in preventing 
nuclear energy from being used for non-peaceful purposes. Innovative and far-reaching 
proposals for achieving a more cost-effective system, covering both declared and undeclared 
activities, had been formulated in the SAGSI report. The Hungarian Atomic Energy 
Commission was prepared to place its facilities at the Agency's disposal for the purpose of 
carrying out tests and trials of the new safeguards approach. 
105. Hungary's nuclear power plant at Paks continued to have a major social, economic 
and technical impact, since it was responsible for generating almost half of the country's total 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 28 

net electricity production. The first unit had been connected to the grid ten years ago and, 
according to Agency recommendations and in line with the practice adopted in industrialized 
countries, safety reassessment was now due. The specific experience and knowledge 
acquired by Hungarian organizations on WWER plants could be utilized in international 
efforts to enhance the safety of Soviet-designed reactors. 

106. The 1991 International Conference on the Safety of Nuclear Power had resulted in 
a valid and good framework for future work towards an international convention on nuclear 
safety and his delegation very much hoped that the convention would soon be finalized. The 
Agency should be given a substantive role in the process of enhancing nuclear safety under 
that convention and his delegation was ready to co-operate in finding answers to any open 
questions that remained. 
107. While nuclear power plant safety held top priority, the problems associated with waste 
disposal could not be underestimated. In 1992 a national project had been launched to 
formulate a long-term strategy for the management and final disposal of all kinds of 
radioactive waste. There were plans to set up an independent institution responsible for the 
construction and operation of a repository. The national project would be implemented 
through a competitive bidding system set up by the National Committee for Technological 
Development. 
108. In 1991 the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission had initiated a comprehensive 
programme for the revision and updating of Hungarian regulations with the result that the 
regulations for accountancy and control of nuclear material and the registration of radioactive 
materials, as well as the regulations concerning the safety of nuclear facilities, had been 
replaced by new ministerial orders. New government decrees had been issued both to update 
the National System for Emergency Planning and Preparedness and to extend the regulations 
concerning nuclear exports and imports. In the context of the important task of further 
enhancement of regulatory activities in the nuclear safety field, Hungary looked forward to 
co-operation co-ordinated by the Agency and assistance from the European Community. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 29 

109. With regard to the revision of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear 
Damage, his delegation hoped that the preparatory work would soon be completed and that 
the diplomatic conference could be convened in the near future. 
110. On the subject of co-ordination of efforts to provide nuclear safety assistance to 
Eastern and Central European countries, his delegation was grateful to the Agency for 
organizing an advisory group meeting to review progress made under the Agency's nuclear 
safety programmes and for the establishment of the steering committee on the safety of 
WWER plants. It also valued the Agency's participation in the working groups established 
by the G-24, and its help to the G-24 in establishing a database on nuclear safety assistance. 
111. Technical co-operation between Hungary and the Agency continued to be very 
successful. The Agency was providing technical assistance for the evaluation of the 
earthquake resistance of the Hungarian nuclear power plant, and potential impact of aircraft 
crashes, assistance in the reconstruction and assessment of the Budapest research reactor, as 
well as IPERS and ASSET missions. In the continuing task of nuclear safety enhancement, 
his delegation welcomed the Secretariat's proposal to set up model technical co-operation 
projects. His country had pledged its full voluntary contribution to the TACF for 1993. 
112. Finally, his delegation recommended that the General Conference approve the Annual 
Report for 1992. 
113. Mr. PASHA (Bangladesh) having welcomed the new Member States of the 
Agency, reiterated his Government's firm belief in the potential which the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy and technology offered for the socio-economic development of his populous 
country. To that end, Bangladesh remained firmly committed to the NPT, to its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and to the creation of a universal non-proliferation regime. 
Although the end of the Cold War had brought positive changes and a relaxation of tension 
on the international scene, the threat of nuclear annihilation had yet to be eliminated. 
114. In recognition of the importance of applied science and technology as a vehicle for 
socio-economic development, his Government had recently elevated its Science and 
Technology Division to the status of a full ministry. The intention was to use and adapt 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 30 

imported technology while gradually increasing research funding. The main areas in which 
nuclear technology was applied to research and development were food preservation, the 
sterilization of medical products, agriculture, radiation protection and environmental 
monitoring, quality control and assurance, electronic instrumentation and control systems, 
radioisotope production, hydrology, non-destructive testing and radiation protection services. 
Imported foodstuffs and consumables were already being tested to determine their 
acceptability for consumption from a radiation point of view. In the area of medicine, the 
country already had one institute and nine other nuclear medicine centres providing services 
involving the use of nuclear and other related techniques for the diagnosis and treatment of 
diseases. There were also plans to set up other centres providing such services. 

115. The services provided by the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission to various 
industries and organizations included an NDT service and training in the use of NDT 
techniques, as well as the use of nuclear and other techniques to study pollution and perform 
elemental analyses. Other developments in Bangladesh included the start of production of 
short-lived radioisotopes, with a view to reducing their importation substantially when 
full-scale production commenced; a manpower training programme to provide for the repair 
and maintenance of equipment used in research and development projects; the joint venture 
between the Bangladesh Atomic Energy Commission and a Bangladesh company, with the 
Agency's assistance, to establish a commercial irradiator plant, which had been successfully 
operating since 1 March 1993 and had encouraged some of the country's entrepreneurs to 
consider setting up similar plants for medical sterilization; the passing of a Nuclear Safety 
and Radiation Control Act by the Bangladesh Parliament to provide a legal framework for 
controlling and limiting the use of ionizing radiation sources; and preparations for a twentyyear 
plan covering R&D activities in the nuclear field, which it was hoped would improve 
the organization and efficiency of research activities and also serve as a basis for future 
assistance from the Agency and other donors in the field of nuclear technology. 
116. Bangladesh currently benefited from 21 projects under the Agency's technical 
assistance programme and a number of others under the research contract programme. He 
gratefully acknowledged the Agency's support and hoped that the Agency would be able to 
contribute towards optimizing the use of existing facilities, especially the research reactor. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 31 

117. Bangladesh was also actively involved in various RCA programmes, and his 
delegation felt strongly that RCA activities should be widened even further to include such 
areas as the application of tracer technology to ground water surveying and studies on river 
flow and sedimentation problems. While the programmes to apply nuclear techniques in 
industry, medicine, agriculture and other sectors of the economy would undoubtedly benefit 
the countries participating in the RCA, the scope of the project on energy and nuclear power 
should be widened to enable the countries concerned to cope successfully with the challenges 
presented by their energy development programmes. Bangladesh had begun to host various 
RCA activities, with the support of the Agency, and was benefiting from the exchange of 
experience they provided. 
118. With a per capita generation of electricity less than one tenth of the Asian average and 
one fortieth of the world average, and limited indigenous primary energy resources, 
Bangladesh was seriously short of the energy it needed to embark on the path of socioeconomic 
development. The demands for energy in general, and electricity in particular, 
were growing rapidly. However, despite the fact that a number of technical and economic 
feasibility studies had confirmed the viability of nuclear power, no start had yet been made 
to implement plans first made three decades previously. 
119. Problems associated with safety and the management of radioactive waste were 
frequently cited as reasons for discouraging the expansion of nuclear power, although the 
technologies for solving those problems were available. Furthermore, a number of countries 
with limited resources of primary energy had demonstrated that it was possible for nuclear 
power to account for a significant share of their overall electricity generation. 
120. The developing countries' need for energy, the bleak prospects for the emergence of 
viable alternative sources of energy, and the harmful environmental effects of conventional 
methods of electricity production were all arguments for increasing the global share of 
nuclear power. However, hardly any developing Member State of the Agency had 
successfully implemented a nuclear power project since the last energy crisis. The Agency 
should thus strengthen its promotional activities to convince the world community that 
nuclear power was a valid option, especially in the energy-scarce developing countries. The 
Agency was in the best position to convince potential suppliers and financing institutions that 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.355 
page 32 

there was a need to increase the global share of nuclear power, and that it was a safe, 
environmentally benign, economic and reliable alternative. As a starting point for such 
promotional activities, a forum of potential financial institutions and promoters should be 
arranged. 

121. In conclusion, while appreciating the Director General's contribution in managing the 
Agency's affairs efficiently and effectively, and the positive and beneficial role the Agency 
had played in developing nuclear technology over the years, his delegation felt that a 
representative from the developing countries should be considered for the post of Director 
General when the term of office of the present incumbent expired. 
ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING NEW MEMBERS OF THE AGENCY 

122. The PRESIDENT announced that the Czech Republic and the Slovak Republic 
had deposited their instruments of acceptance of the Agency's Statute with the Government 
of the United States of America. They were henceforth full Members of the Agency. 
The meeting rose at 1.5 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
8 April 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 
GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 
Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 28 September 1993, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 

Later: Mr. YIMER (Ethiopia) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 
Approval of the appointment of the Director General 1 - 12 

8 
General debate and annual report for 1992 (resumed) 13 - 233 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Pakistan 13-28 
India 29- 47 
United Kingdom 48 - 63 
Mauritius 64-71 
Bulgaria 72 - 82 
Poland 83- 96 
Brazil 97-111 
Malaysia 112-121 
Australia 122 - 140 
Germany 141 - 149 
Italy 150 - 167 
Greece 168 - 181 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-03753 (V) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-14O0 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipl 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 


page 2 

Item of the 
agenda* 

ABACC 
AFRA 


ARCAL 


ASSET 
CEC 
CERN 


Chemical Weapons 
Convention 
CIS 
DPRK 
EBRD 
ECE 
EURATOM 
FAO 

G-7 
G-24 

ICRP 
IGPRAD 

INSAG 
IRRT 
IRS 
NEA 
NPT 
NUSS programme 
OECD 
OSART 
PLO 
RADWASS 
Rarotonga Treaty 
RBMK 
RCA 

SAGSI 

Paragraphs 
New Zealand 182 - 194 
Canada 195 - 207 
Yemen 208 223 
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 224 225 
Greece 226 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting 
and Control of Nuclear Materials 227 - 233 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 

Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 

Technology in Latin America 

Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 

Commission of the European Communities 

European Centre for Nuclear Research 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 

Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction 

Commonwealth of Independent States 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 

Economic Commission for Europe 

European Atomic Energy Community 

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 

Group of Seven 

Group of Twenty-Four 

International Commission on Radiological Protection 

Intergovernmental Panel of Experts on Radioactive 

Waste Disposal at Sea 

International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 

International Regulatory Review Team 

Incident Reporting System 

Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Agency's programme on nuclear safety standards for nuclear power plants 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

Operational Safety Review Team 

Palestinian Liberation Organization 

Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 

South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 

High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 

Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 

Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

(for Asia and the Pacific) 

Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 


sccc 

START 
TACF 
THORP 

Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNDP 
UNESCO 
USSR 
WANO 
World Bank (IBRD) 
WWER 

GC(XXXVII)OR.356 
page 3 

Abbreviations 
(Contd.) 


(Argentine-Brazilian) Common System of Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant 
(British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.) 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 4 

APPROVAL OF THE APPOINTMENT OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 
(GC(XXXVII)/1058) 

1. The PRESIDENT said that, as stated in document GC(XXXVII)/1058, the 
Board of Governors, acting in accordance with Article VII. A of the Statute, had appointed 
Mr. Hans Blix to serve as Director General of the Agency for a period of four years from 
1 December 1993. Under the same Article, the Board had further requested the General 
Conference to approve the appointment and had accordingly recommended that it adopt the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1058. 
2. He asked whether the General Conference wished to follow the Board's 
recommendation. 
3. The draft resolution contained in document GCCXXXVII)/1058 was adopted. 
4. At the invitation of the President. Mr. Blix entered the meeting. 
5. The PRESIDENT informed Mr. Blix that the General Conference had 
approved his appointment to the post of Director General for a further term. He was pleased 
to be the first to congratulate him and invited him to take the oath of office. 
6. Mr. BOX took the following oath: 
"I solemnly swear to exercise in all loyalty, discretion and conscience the functions 
entrusted to me as Director General of the International Atomic Energy Agency, to 
discharge these functions and to regulate my conduct with the interest of the Agency 
only in view, and not to seek or accept instructions in regard to the performance of 
my duties from any Government or other authority external to the Agency." 

7. The DIRECTOR GENERAL thanked Member States for the confidence they 
had shown in him by appointing him for a fourth term. The years ahead were likely to be 
full of exciting challenges and he was grateful for the opportunity to work with the 
Governments of Member States and an extremely competent Secretariat. 
8. Nuclear disarmament and arms control measures would drastically reduce the number 
of nuclear weapons in the world, but might also call for verification activities by the Agency. 
The non-proliferation regime could become universal. A large number of topics needed to 
be discussed before the 1995 NPT conference and the Agency would have a role to play in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 5 

those discussions. Other important issues included the strengthening of nuclear safety to 
improve acceptance of nuclear power and increase its role in global energy production, and 
the transfer of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry. 

9. He enjoyed working for the Agency. The Governments of its Member States and the 
policy-making organs had a long tradition of defining joint interests and translating them into 
constructive action. Although politics were inevitably never far away, the organization's 
dedication to science, technology and rationality was another great asset. Committed and 
highly competent international staff was the organization's third asset. 
10. He was proud to have been appointed head of the Secretariat for a fourth term and 
assured all the Member States that he would serve them enthusiastically and impartially. 
11. Mr. deYTURRIAGA BARBERAN (Spain), speaking on behalf of the Western 
Europe and Others Group, Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea), on behalf of the Group of 77, 
Mr. KOSTENKO (Ukraine), on behalf of the East Europe Group, Mr. WALKER 
(Australia), on behalf of the South East Asia and the Pacific Group, Mr. BAKSHI (India), 
on behalf of the Middle East and South Asia Group, Mr. YIMER (Ethiopia), on behalf of 
the Africa Group, Mr. DURAN ABAD (Ecuador), on behalf of the Latin America Group, 
and Ms. BATACLAN (Philippines), on behalf of Far East Group, warmly congratulated 
Mr. Blix on his appointment. The fact that he had been unanimously granted a fourth term 
was evidence of the high quality of his work over the past 12 years, during which the 
Agency had had to face many challenges in ever-widening areas of responsibility. Under the 
Director General's extremely competent guidance, it had met them successfully. 
12. The representatives of the geographical groups wished the Director General every 
success and assured him of the continued support of the States in their groups. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (resumed 
from meeting 355) 

13. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan), after warmly welcoming the Slovak Republic, the 
Czech Republic and the Republics of the Marshall Islands, Armenia and Kazakhstan as new 
members of the Agency, said that the steady increase in the membership of the Agency 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 6 

conferred on it an increasingly global character, which should naturally be reflected in its 
policies. 

14. After years of conflict, hope for peace - admittedly fragile, nevertheless real - had 
emerged in some parts of the world in 1993. Pakistan trusted that the peace process would 
be extended and consolidated so that the resources hitherto spent on a pointless arms race 
would henceforth serve a more worthwhile cause, namely promotion of human welfare. 
15. There had also been significant progress in the nuclear field and there was increasing 
recognition of the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones. He reaffirmed Pakistan's 
unequivocal commitment to universal nuclear non-proliferation. A regional approach offered 
a constructive way of achieving that goal. Pakistan had, therefore, been advocating - since 
1972 - the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia and had put forward 
several other proposals for the establishment of an equitable and non-discriminatory nonproliferation 
regime. It was also ready to co-operate with Member States of the region in 
considering any other realistic suggestion to achieve that end. 
16. With regard to the transfer of nuclear techniques for peaceful purposes, his delegation 
felt that restrictions in that field could be counter-productive in the long term; a country 
denied legitimate access to nuclear techniques might develop its own techniques, which might 
possibly be less safe and would certainly be less transparent. International co-operation, on 
the other hand, would create an openness and transparency which would promote a sense of 
responsibility and reciprocity. The Agency had an important statutory role to play in that 
context. It should continue to strengthen its promotional activities and give them at least as 
much importance as its regulatory activities. In particular, it should ensure that there was 
no restriction in technology transfer for facilities under safeguards. 
17. In the wider perspective, only stability and economic prosperity could lead to lasting 
peace. Energy was the driving force of economic growth. The conventional means of 
electricity generation using fossil fuels posed serious environmental problems; more than 
6 billion tons of carbon continued to be dumped into the atmosphere every year. With 
further industrialization, the situation would worsen unless appropriate alternative measures 
were adopted. Nuclear power offered a viable and sustainable solution; it was 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 7 

environmentally benign and cost-competitive in most countries. There were, however, two 
major obstacles to the rapid introduction of nuclear power in the developing countries in that 
it was capital intensive and technologically demanding. The Agency should address that 
issue in an effective manner. Nuclear power had developed very unevenly, with just five 
per cent of the world's capacity located in the developing countries. The Agency should take 
account of the energy requirements of those countries, as stipulated in Article m . A.2 of its 
Statute. It was heartening that the Agency continued to devote its attention to nuclear safety 
issues. It could play a more vigorous role in promoting the sharing of experience and the 
transfer of safety-related information to developing countries with old reactors, as it had been 
doing for countries operating older Soviet-designed reactors. South-South co-operation could 
also be encouraged since a number of developing countries could now profitably share their 
experience in the design, construction and operation of nuclear power plants. 

18. The General Conference had, in resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/587, called on the 
Agency to maintain and strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities, and to develop effective programmes aimed at 
improving the scientific and technological capabilities of developing countries in the fields 
of peaceful applications of nuclear energy and achieving sustainable development. It should 
be noted that the majority of developing countries were oil importers and needed nuclear 
energy to meet their growing requirements and thereby to alleviate poverty. Unless nuclear 
power were seen as an engine of socio-economic development, it might lose its credibility 
in the Third World at large. Pakistan hoped, therefore, that in the years to come the Agency 
would propose some bold new initiatives - like the excellent concept of model projects - to 
enhance the scope and efficiency of technical co-operation and to restore the balance between 
its promotional and regulatory activities. 
19. Referring briefly to a few issues related to the Agency's working modalities, he said 
that with regard to the amendment of Article VI. A.2 of the Statute, which had been on the 
agenda of the Board and the General Conference for almost 20 years, a majority of delegates 
had adopted resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/600 the previous year to ensure that urgent steps 
were taken to redress the gross under-representation of certain regions on the Board of 
Governors. It was a priority issue, particularly in view of the increase in the Agency's 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 8 

membership. Meanwhile, relatively advanced States in the various regions should help 
promote the development of other Member States, both through the Agency and bilaterally. 

20. Pakistan supported adoption of the Agency's budget for 1994 as presented in 
document GC(XXXVII)/1062. It continued to believe that the concept of zero growth was 
unduly restrictive and that the Agency should free itself of that strait-jacket. He praised the 
sense of responsibility of the Secretariat, which had experience in the optimization of 
resources, and hoped that it would be allowed - indeed encouraged - to apply a moderate 
measure of overprogramming - a practice which had been rather unwisely discontinued 
several years before and which would be particularly welcome in the area of technical 
co-operation, where the overall implementation rate rarely exceeded 70%. 
21. He called on all Member States to make early payment of their pledges to the TACF. 
Noting that Pakistan always paid its assessed and voluntary contributions in time, he took the 
opportunity of pledging its 1994 voluntary contribution to the TACF corresponding to their 
base rate of assessment. 
22. Briefly recalling resolutions GC(XXXVI)/RES/598 and 599, calling for better 
representation of nationals of developing countries and of women in the Agency's Secretariat, 
he said it was in the Agency's interest to pursue those objectives in order to enhance the 
representative character of the Secretariat while maintaining its level of competence. 
23. Pakistan had made some notable strides in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. Work 
on the 300 MW reactor under construction in co-operation with China at Chashma was 
proceeding according to schedule; an important landmark had been reached in August with 
the pouring of concrete for the foundations of the reactor building. He thanked the Agency 
for its co-operation in that respect and trusted that it would continue. 
24. The nuclear power plant at Karachi had been operating satisfactorily for several years 
on domestically-produced fuel. Several tests had shown that, in spite of its age, it conformed 
to current standards. Steps were being taken to upgrade its safety and extend its useful life 
beyond its design lifetime. Pakistan appreciated the contribution made by the Agency in 
implementing that major technical assistance project. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 9 

25. Pakistan also continued to promote the application of radiation sources and 
radioisotopes in agriculture, medicine and industry. Radiation-induced mutation had made 
it possible to develop 19 varieties of crops, including a variety of cotton which had had a 
significant impact on the country's economy. Unfortunately, that major national crop was 
being threatened by the pink bollworm and by a virus that damaged the leaves of the plant. 
Local scientists were working on ways of combating that menace and assistance had been 
requested from both the Agency and the FAO. Pakistan had ten nuclear medicine centres 
applying irradiation techniques in the diagnosis and therapy of malignant diseases, which had 
treated nearly 180 000 patients the previous year. Construction had started on two additional 
medical centres to cater for the growing needs of the population. A commercial irradiator 
had been operating for several years to sterilize medical and surgical supplies, and feasibility 
studies on extension of its use to food irradiation were being finalized. 
26. South-South co-operation in some sectors of agriculture and medicine would be 
opportune and cost-effective, since the nuclear techniques had become more or less 
standardized and the basic know-how was now available in a large number of countries. 
Pakistan would like the advanced nations to take steps for the benefit of developing countries 
in the provision of water for drinking and agricultural purposes. 
27. Trained manpower was vital to any development effort, and Pakistan was continuing 
to upgrade facilities at various specialized institutions providing training in areas such as 
nuclear science and engineering, computing and nuclear power plant operation. 
28. Pakistan appreciated the role played by the RCA in catalysing South-South 
co-operation in various areas of nuclear research and development. It had hosted several 
workshops and training courses and would continue to give its full support to RCA activities. 
It was always ready to share its modest expertise with other developing countries and was 
grateful for the valuable technical co-operation it had received through the Agency. 
29. Mr. CHIDAMBARAM (India) congratulated the Director General on his welldeserved 
nomination and the Secretariat on its efforts to attain the Agency's important 
objectives. He also welcomed the new Member States to the Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 10 

30. Over the past few years, the world had witnessed momentous changes, which 
inevitably affected the Agency. Certain political developments had led to a significant 
increase in its role and activities in the area of safeguards, attracting public attention and 
giving the impression that safeguards were its primary or even sole concern. Such 
misconceptions, if not corrected, would undermine the Agency's very raison d'etre. 
31. It was important to recall that the Agency's primary objective, as clearly stated in the 
Statute, was "to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world". For many countries, nuclear energy might represent the 
only stable and viable source of power in the relatively near future. The Agency's Member 
States, particularly the developing countries, also wished to benefit, through the Agency's 
promotional activities, from the many other peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
32. Safeguards were an important aspect of the Agency's functions and useful work was 
being done in that area, but in order to be productive and cost-effective, the safeguards 
system should concentrate on activities involving nuclear materials of safeguards significance. 
The main objective of the safeguards system was to generate confidence and it was therefore 
important to ensure that measures taken in the future to strengthen the system were free of 
subjectivity and qualitative judgements. His delegation would co-operate fully with the 
Agency in establishing a streamlined, productive and cost-effective safeguards system. 
33. India was one of the founder signatories of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which 
was a universal and non-discriminatory convention. Nevertheless, although it had been 
suggested that the Agency should draw on the provisions of that Convention relating to the 
verification mechanism in order to modify the safeguards system, his delegation believed it 
would be more prudent to wait and see how the Convention, which was still in its infancy, 
would be implemented. 
34. The Agency could contribute to greater public awareness of the variety of nuclear 
applications in areas such as electricity production, agriculture, industry and medicine. Such 
promotion was all the more important in view of the mistaken perception of the Agency as 
the world's nuclear "policeman". He was pleased to note from the Director General's 
opening statement that the inspectorate was not a supranational police force. The Agency 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 11 

should highlight the usefulness of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy through programmes 
attracting public attention and interest, such as the food irradiation programme. There were 
many other such programmes and the Agency should take immediate initiatives in that 
regard. 

35. Turning to financial matters, he said that lack of funds was one of the Agency' s major 
difficulties. He hoped that all Member States would pay their contributions on time, 
although that would still not make it possible to meet the requirements of the developing 
countries. 
36. Voluntary contributions, which were the primary source of financing for the Agency's 
promotional activities, had declined significantly and it was necessary to devise a mechanism 
to assure the financing of technical co-operation activities. In that context, he took the 
opportunity to pledge India's full assessed voluntary contribution to the TACF for 1994. 
37. Non-proliferation was an important international objective which India fully 
supported; indeed, it had an unblemished track record in that area. His country nevertheless 
deplored the fact that non-proliferation had sometimes been used in recent times as a means 
of restricting access to technology, since certain technologies essential for the growth of 
developing countries had been classified as dual-use technologies. It was unfortunate that 
international co-operation in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy had declined 
considerably. The growing list of items subject to export restrictions was depriving the 
developing countries of the benefits of technological progress, not only in the field of nuclear 
power, but also in other areas vital for their development. Corrective action was required 
and the Agency should take new initiatives to promote international co-operation in the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
38. India endeavoured to share with other countries the expertise it had developed over 
the past four decades in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In the past year, a number of 
Agency fellows had been trained in India and the services of Indian experts had also been 
made available to the Agency. In addition, India offered training to various countries on a 
bilateral basis. It welcomed the Agency's role in strengthening technical co-operation among 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 12 

institutions of Asia and the Pacific under the RCA, to which India had contributed by 
organizing training programmes and providing equipment and expert services. 

39. India had always attached particular importance to manpower training with the 
objective of building up a network of scientists and technicians who could direct the 
country's nuclear power programme and develop new peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. During the past four decades, India had developed sophisticated training 
programmes in a large number of areas and the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre had 
provided specialized one-year training courses for over 6000 students. One-year diploma 
courses were also available in the areas of radiation protection and nuclear medicine and onemonth 
courses on radioimmunoassay, industrial radiography and safety. Over 350 experts 
were contributing to those training programmes through various teaching activities. 
40. He was pleased to announce that India was ready to share its expertise and experience 
in human resource development with other Agency Members States. If necessary, India 
could also provide special training programmes designed to meet specific requirements. 
41. India had designed a 5/10 MW multi-purpose research reactor with a high enough flux 
for advanced physics and materials research, neutron activation analysis, radioisotope 
production and other applications, and it would be happy to offer that reactor for export 
under international safeguards. India had also designed a small 30 kW experimental reactor 
fuelled entirely by uranium-233 (600 g). The reactor had been tested in Trombay 
(PURNIMA-III) and it was being installed at the Indira Gandhi Centre for Atomic Research 
at Kalpakkam. It would be used for neutron radiography, neutron activation analysis and 
various experiments. It would also be available for export. 
42. In the area of environmental monitoring, India had made significant progress and was 
able to offer radiation monitoring networks with the necessary expertise to Member States 
which were interested. It could also offer heavy water produced in India for export under 
Agency safeguards. 
43. In the past year, the Indian nuclear power programme had developed in many areas. 
In May the first unit (220 MW(e)) of the Kakrapar plant had begun commercial electricity 
production. Commissioning tests for the second unit were at an advanced stage and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 13 

connection to the grid was planned for the beginning of 1994. The use of thorium bundles 
for the first time at Kakrapar in order to achieve initial flux flattening had been successful. 
India was thus gaining valuable experience in various aspects of the handling of thorium in 
the nuclear fuel cycle. A pilot facility to process thorium fuel elements was being set up, 
which would eventually lead to the construction of similar plants with larger capacity. Work 
on the two units of 220 MW(e) being constructed at Kaiga and Rajasthan was continuing 
according to schedule. Significant progress had been made in the design of the 500 MW(e) 
pressurized heavy water reactors to be built at Tarapur. 

44. Safety was a primary concern in the design and operation of Indian reactors. It was 
achieved through quality assurance and well-defined regulatory practices, supervised by an 
independent Atomic Energy Regulatory Board. Research and development programmes had 
led to the development of a number of useful technologies for power reactors, such as an 
in-service inspection system for coolant channels, a video inspection system, and a system 
based on vibration analysis for the diagnosis of faults. India was also continuing work on 
the design of an advanced heavy water reactor. In addition, it was building a nationally 
designed and manufactured synchrotron which was due to be commissioned in 1994 at the 
Indore Centre for Advanced Technology. 
45. India had been reprocessing spent nuclear fuel for 30 years. It was completing the 
construction of a reprocessing plant at Kalpakkam to add to the existing plants at Trombay 
and Tarapur. It was also setting up a pilot plant for the separation of uranium-233 from 
thorium, which for India was the nuclear fuel of the future. The Indian nuclear programme 
gave priority to the treatment and disposal of various types of radioactive waste generated 
in nuclear fuel cycle activities. A number of development programmes were under way for 
the management of low-, intermediate- and high-level wastes. India was also participating 
in a number of Agency co-ordinated research programmes in that area. 
46. India was a leading producer of radioisotopes for medical, pharmaceutical, industrial, 
agricultural, geological and hydrological applications. Nuclear technology was multidisciplinary 
in nature and offered many practical spin-offs in the areas of materials, 
information technology and biotechnology. The know-how and technology from research 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 14 

centres had been passed on to industry in very different areas ranging from solar energy to 
the railways. 

47. In conclusion, he stressed the need to step up efforts to promote peaceful nuclear 
energy applications and to initiate large-scale public awareness programmes. The safeguards 
system should be streamlined to make it more productive and cost-effective. There was also 
an immediate need to rejuvenate and expand programmes for international co-operation in 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. For its part, his delegation would support and 
co-operate actively with the Agency to achieve those aims in the coming year. 
48. Mr. WALKER (United Kingdom) said that in his country nuclear energy 
continued to make a major contribution to satisfying energy needs in an increasingly 
competitive market. The two nuclear power generating companies, Nuclear Electric and 
Scottish Nuclear, were making progress in all areas and were reporting growing profits, 
lower unit costs, higher output and an increased market share. That progress was matched 
by further improvement in the already excellent results in the area of safety. With the help 
of many sectors of industry, Nuclear Electric hoped to start up the United Kingdom's first 
pressurized water reactor at Sizewell in 1994 - on schedule and within the planned budget. 
British Nuclear Fuels had recently completed its new THORP reprocessing plant at Sellafield, 
designed to meet the requirements of customers around the world. Commissioning tests for 
uranium had been carried out, but reprocessing itself would not commence until the statutory 
authorizations relating to discharges had been obtained. 
49. His Government considered that the most effective means of meeting the country's 
energy needs was to allow market mechanisms to operate. That policy was presenting the 
United Kingdom's nuclear industry with continuing challenges and opportunities as 
preparations were under way for a review of the prospects for nuclear power. The 
Government had committed itself to such an undertaking when, in November 1989, nuclear 
power plants had been withdrawn from the privatization of the electricity supply industry. 
The timetable and modalities for the review were under consideration and would be 
announced in due course. The nuclear industry was confident that it could prove that new 
power plants were commercially viable. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 15 

50. Turning to the international scene, he associated himself with the congratulations 
given to the Agency on behalf of the European Community and thanked the Agency again 
for its continued successful promotion of non-power applications of nuclear energy to help 
improve the quality of life in an increasing number of countries. 
51. It was very important that continued progress should be made in the areas of 
safeguards and safety, since they were crucial to fostering confidence in the use of nuclear 
technology for the benefit of all. 
52. The NPT and associated comprehensive safeguards agreements constituted the primary 
assurance for the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy throughout the world. There 
was no doubt that the Agency's full-scope safeguards agreements would remain the key 
element in encouraging widespread acceptance of nuclear science within a coherent and stable 
world framework. The Agency had a primary role in that process and deserved the support 
of all its Member States in its efforts to ensure that countries honoured their obligations 
under the Treaty and to prevent a climate of mutual suspicion or the clandestine development 
of nuclear weapons. 
53. In that context, his delegation was grateful for the traditional objectivity and 
impartiality maintained by the Agency with respect to the DPRK, where it had identified noncompliance 
with safeguards and had subsequently referred the matter to the United Nations 
Security Council. His Government deeply regretted the DPRK's failure to comply with its 
safeguards agreement and urged the DPRK to honour the commitment it had made on 19 
July 1993 to enter into dialogue with the Agency and to begin discussions with the Republic 
of Korea. The United Kingdom was determined to help find a satisfactory solution whereby 
the DPRK complied fully with its safeguards agreement and reaffirmed its commitment to 
the NPT. The Agency should also be congratulated on the vital role it continued to play in 
Iraq in implementing the Security Council resolutions requiring that illicit nuclear activities 
should be identified and suppressed. 
54. His country welcomed the accession of Belarus to the NPT and hoped that all the 
countries of the former Soviet Union, in particular those which still had nuclear weapons, 
would soon follow suit. While pleased to note that a start had been made on deactivating 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 16 

weapons on Ukrainian territory, his delegation expected Ukraine and Kazakhstan to take all 
the necessary steps to accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States, in accordance with 
their solemn committments made on the occasion of the Lisbon agreements in 1992. In the 
meantime, members of the Nuclear Suppliers Group had agreed to continue providing exports 
to those countries for a transitional period in order to ensure the safe operation of nuclear 
power plants until Agency safeguards could be applied to all their facilities. It was an 
interim measure justified by the exceptional circumstances, and the United Kingdom appealed 
to the States concerned to take the necessary steps immediately to fulfil their obligations 
under the Lisbon Protocol to enable the continuation of supplies on a stable and normal basis. 

55. With regard to Latin America, his country urged those countries which had not 
already done so to sign and ratify the Tlatelolco Treaty and the NPT. The quadripartite 
safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency should also be 
fully ratified and brought into effect. 
56. He appreciated the Agency's continuing efforts to strengthen the safeguards system. 
Difficult questions concerning the effectiveness of safeguards had been tackled with a fresh 
outlook and commendable enthusiasm. As expected, SAGSI had made a vital contribution. 
That momentum should be maintained and top priority given to examination of appropriate 
measures to strengthen and streamline the safeguards system. 
57. His delegation was convinced that the highest priority should continue to be given to 
safeguards in decisions on the Agency's budget and welcomed the many initiatives currently 
being examined with a view to improving the cost-effectiveness of safeguards. The United 
Kingdom attached particular importance to rationalization in the division of inspection 
responsibilities between the Agency and EURATOM. It looked forward to completion of 
the current negotiations on the new partnership agreement and its early implementation. His 
delegation also looked forward to receiving the External Auditor's 1994 report, which was 
due to focus on the administration of safeguards. 
58. Nuclear safety, which - like safeguards - ranked as a key priority for his delegation, 
provided an opportunity for the Agency to consolidate its know-how and encourage all 
Member States to make responsible use of nuclear energy. His delegation fully supported 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 17 

the Agency's actions to promote high levels of nuclear safety all over the world and 
international measures to strengthen co-operation in the fields of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. 

59. The United Kingdom therefore fully supported moves towards the establishment of 
a nuclear safety convention which would provide the basis for safety regulations in Member 
States. The aim should be to strengthen nuclear safety in the world through legislative, 
regulatory and administrative measures, without imposing unnecessary multilateral 
judgements. The Agency should act as the depositary for the convention and provide the 
secretariat for the peer review process. It should also continue to play a central role in the 
identification of generic safety problems and in disseminating information on solutions 
worldwide. 
60. The Agency's actions in that area were usefully contributing to the international effort 
to assist countries in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union in improving nuclear 
safety. The Agency's technical support to the G-24 was essential if that assistance were to 
be properly targeted. His country was in favour of the Agency developing that role, 
provided that its activities did not duplicate assistance from other sources. The multilateral 
programme of nuclear safety assistance could only be successful if all those involved showed 
that they could work effectively with each other. The need to co-operate and avoid 
duplication of effort was no less relevant in other areas of the Agency's work in the present 
climate of budgetary constraint. 
61. He reiterated the importance that his delegation attached to the Agency's Basic Safety 
Standards and to the updating of those Standards in the light of the latest ICRP 
recommendations. The best approach was undoubtedly to retain the tried and tested structure 
of the documents dealing with nuclear safety and to recognize that nuclear safety and 
radiation protection raised associated but very different questions which could not be 
incorporated into a single set of standards. 
62. With regard to financial matters, his delegation shared the common concern over the 
current financial situation of the Agency, which could not successfully complete its 
programme of work unless Member States were prepared to pay their assessed contributions 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 18 

promptly. There was no indication that the situation would improve in the short term; the 
Agency should therefore consider a more rigorous appraisal and priority-setting procedure 
in order to re-establish a balance with expected income. His delegation supported the 
commendable way in which the Agency had continued to adapt to a series of new and 
demanding challenges over the past year. 

63. Lastly, his delegation was confident that the Agency would be able to deal with its 
financial difficulties and continue to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, while 
working to strengthen safeguards and encourage further progress in the field of nuclear 
safety. 
64. Mr. UTCHANAH (Mauritius) said that, in the many years in which he had 
held office, the Director General had demonstrated the considerable dedication and skill 
required to guide the Agency through difficult times and it was therefore fitting that the 
Agency should call on his services for a further period of four years. That continuity became 
even more necessary as, with the end of the Cold War, the Agency's role and functions 
would undoubtedly increase. The membership of the Agency had grown, indicating the 
confidence placed in it by the international community, especially in the nuclear field. The 
Agency should prepare itself for a host of new challenges and continue both to ensure that 
its Members acceded to the NPT and to strengthen the safeguards system. 
65. Although the Cold War was over, regional conflicts - even on a reduced scale persisted. 
He was therefore pleased that the General Conference's agenda included an item 
on the need to strengthen the Agency's main activities. Developing countries were often at 
a disadvantage with regard to access to technology. In that context, the Agency could play 
a crucial role in ensuring the transfer of appropriate nuclear technology to speed up the 
development process of more than half of the world's population. In practical terms, the 
Agency should take all the necessary measures to strengthen co-operation in such fields as 
agriculture, health and electrical energy. The draft proposal before the General Conference 
on the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries was commendable. A 
positive approach on the part of the Agency to ensure that the developing countries benefited 
from nuclear technology was one of the challenges facing it as the twenty-first century approached. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 19 

66. Nuclear safety and radiological accidents knew no frontiers. Universally accepted 
nuclear safety and radiation protection standards should gradually be developed and the 
Agency should be supported in its efforts to provide technical expertise to those Member 
States requiring it. 
67. The world had become a safer place, but the Agency's responsibilities had not 
diminished. Indeed, the reverse was the case with the international community giving the 
Agency a prominent role in monitoring the safeguards system and reporting on compliance 
with it. The various documents before the General Conference added a new dimension to 
the concept of a nuclear-weapon-free zone, which could not be translated into reality unless 
all countries were willing to open their nuclear programmes to independent inspection by the 
Agency. 
68. As an African nation, Mauritius welcomed the recent agreement between the African 
National Congress and the South African Government aimed at increasing the political role 
of the black majority. Democracy had triumphed again. He hoped that in the coming year 
South Africa would join other African nations and work towards African unity. 
69. At the Agency's thirty-sixth General Conference, emphasis had been placed on the 
need for South Africa to co-operate with the Agency in implementing its safeguards 
agreement. The concept of establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa was already 
at an advanced stage and would be actively followed by Mauritius. Successful 
implementation of the safeguards agreement with South Africa and the positive steps taken 
towards the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa would help relieve national 
tensions and remind the world that nuclear science and technology also had numerous 
peaceful applications. To use such technology safely, however, appropriate training in the 
relevant fields was urgently required. He therefore welcomed the Agency's initiatives to 
develop training programmes. The use of regional groups, such as those created through 
AFRA or ARCAL, to initiate and promote training programmes for the scientific community 
would help create the necessary awareness at the lowest cost. For a genuine transfer of 
technology to the developing world, appropriate education and training had to be provided. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 20 

70. The environment was precious, and it was important to preserve and improve its 
quality for future generations. Lessons should be learned from past mistakes and early 
corrective action taken. He welcomed the fact that the General Conference would have the 
opportunity to discuss the critical issue of nuclear waste management. As nuclear technology 
became more complex, the need to develop efficient waste management methods became ever 
more urgent. Nuclear waste disposal should be monitored to prevent waste from being 
dumped in developing countries. The Agency should continue to co-operate with other 
institutions so that appropriate conventions could be concluded. 
71. Mauritius had always adopted a pragmatic approach in its development process. 
Projects with the Agency focused on two main activities, namely the use of isotopes to map 
underground water reserves and radiation protection, especially in the health sector. 
Mauritius had opted for a targeted approach, which had met with some success and took 
account of national priorities, because it had limited resources in terms of qualified personnel 
and equipment. The regional group formed through AFRA was still in its formative years 
and it would take some time before it achieved the same level of maturity as other regional 
groups. He was nevertheless confident that, given time, AFRA would become the regional 
forum for nuclear science and technology in Africa. 
Mr. Yimer (Ethiopia) took the Chair. 

72. Mr. JANEV (Bulgaria) noted that nuclear non-proliferation issues and Agency 
safeguards had been at the forefront of international headlines throughout the year. The NPT 
remained the most important building block of the international regime designed to cope with 
the danger of the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
73. The international community needed to take effective action to safeguard nuclear 
materials and to ensure the timely detection and prevention of the clandestine production or 
transfer of nuclear weapons. The Agency's role in that respect was well established but 
needed to be enhanced. The Agency had to be given all the resources it required to 
strengthen its safeguards system and conduct special inspections. In the new international 
situation, the Security Council could become an effective forum for the enforcement of non

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 21 

proliferation agreements to which the Agency could refer any unresolved cases of 
proliferation. 

74. The new safeguards system which was taking shape within the Agency required that 
the information provided by the inspected State be supplemented by other data. The actions 
which the Agency's principal organs had taken to implement the concept of universal 
reporting of exports and imports of nuclear material, nuclear-related equipment and other 
non-nuclear material deserved to be encouraged and developed further as a means of 
supporting the Agency's safeguards programme. 
75. The Bulgarian Government had established a national system for the control of 
nuclear-related exports which met the new international requirements. That measure should 
greatly facilitate the implementation of any decision to participate in a possible future 
universal nuclear reporting system. 
76. In the context of the economic reforms which were currently under way in Bulgaria, 
and as a result of the radical social and political changes which had taken place several years 
previously, nuclear energy continued to be one of the mainstays of the country's energy 
policy. In 1992, nuclear power had accounted for approximately one third of the total 
amount of energy generated in Bulgaria - which placed the country thirteenth in rank in the 
world - despite the fact that two WWER-440 reactors had been inoperative. 
77. In 1992 and 1993, Bulgaria had made reasonable progress with the implementation 
of the recommendations and suggestions of the Agency's safety review mission of 1991 and 
in responding to the more general problems identified through the Agency's programme on 
the safety of nuclear power plants with WWER-440/230 reactors. That progress was the 
fruit of considerable efforts on the part of the Bulgarian Electricity Company, the power 
plant staff, the design organization, and the Bulgarian Nuclear Safety Authority. Since the 
end of 1991, a large number of activities had been under way with a view to bringing the 
plant into line with the design standards and operational safety practices of the industrialized 
countries. 
78. The CEC, WANO, and the consortium of nuclear energy regulatory organizations had 
assisted with the implementation of those measures. In addition, the CEC, the World Bank 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 22 

and the Governments of the United States of America, the United Kingdom and France had 
provided invaluable financial assistance. For its part, the Agency had played an active role 
in solving various technical problems. The solution of the problems of the Kozloduy plant 
was a unique example of efficient international co-operation where all the participants were 
determined to continue and bring to a conclusion the work which had been undertaken. In 
that regard, he noted that the financial aspect of safety issues was of great importance to the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe, which were going through serious economic 
difficulties during the current transitional period. The economic situation in Bulgaria was 
being further exacerbated by Bulgaria's compliance with the United Nations resolution on the 
embargo against Yugoslavia, which was not only inflicting heavy economic losses, but also 
seriously limiting the Bulgarian Government's capacity to implement fully and swiftly all the 
measures planned. 

79. His delegation had studied thoroughly the Agency's Annual Report for 1992 and it 
associated itself with those delegations which had expressed their approval of that document. 
The Agency had made considerable efforts to compensate for its lack of funds and to 
implement the technical co-operation programme despite the difficult circumstances. Bulgaria 
had continued to receive technical assistance from the Agency and was grateful to the 
Department of Technical Co-operation, and in particular to the Deputy Director General, Mr. 
Qian, for the assistance it had received. 
80. That co-operation in areas associated with the improvement of nuclear safety, 
radiation protection, the national regulatory body, and the reassessment of radioactive waste 
management had been very useful and he hoped it would continue in the future. However, 
though Bulgaria, like the Agency, paid particular attention to nuclear safety, it was also 
interested in non-power applications of nuclear energy, particularly in agriculture and 
medicine, and it hoped to receive similar assistance from the Agency for projects in those 
areas. 
81. Bulgaria had recently hosted a research co-ordination meeting on the biological effects 
of hot particles from the Chernobyl accident and hoped that the new area of research which 
had been identified at that meeting, namely radioactive particles in nuclear power plants, 
would become the subject of an Agency research programme. Bulgaria was particularly 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 23 

interested in the training activities on accident analysis and would like a training simulator 
to be developed for the Kozloduy plant within the framework of the technical co-operation 
programme. 

82. Bulgaria would continue in the future to do its best to support the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme and, in conclusion, he once again expressed the appreciation and 
unreserved support of the Bulgarian Government for the Agency and its activities aimed at 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and preventing the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons. 
83. Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland) said that the developments which had 
taken place since the preceding session of the General Conference had once again 
demonstrated that the Agency played a major role in the areas of international security, 
economic development, nuclear safety and environmental issues. Some events seemed to 
indicate that its role could be even further expanded in future to include new verification 
tasks relating both to nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament. Enlarging the 
Agency's verification function, by extending it to cover nuclear materials released as a result 
of reductions in nuclear weapons arsenals for example, would aid the cause of nonproliferation 
and, at the same time, help promote worldwide public acceptance of nuclear 
power. 
84. The Agency should be congratulated on its continuing determined efforts in Iraq to 
implement United Nations Security Council resolution 687. The fact that, as announced by 
the Director General in his statement, the Agency had concluded that Iraq's nuclear weapons 
programme had been destroyed or neutralized was a very important conclusion and the 
Agency was to be praised for the contribution it had made in that regard. Poland also 
supported the strengthening of the safeguards system using the experience acquired during 
the operations in Iraq. The Agency's extensive safeguards activities in South Africa, and its 
work to verify that the South African nuclear weapons programme had been terminated, had 
rendered that country's integration into the international non-proliferation regime credible and 
had made a clear contribution to the process of denuclearization which was currently under 
way in Africa. The determined action of the South African Government in support of nonproliferation 
and its decision to adopt the status of a non-nuclear-weapon State under the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 24 

NPT, as well as the reaction of other African States and the Agency's involvement, augured 
well for the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. The news from Latin America 
was equally encouraging and there were grounds to hope that the Tlatelolco Treaty would 
soon enter into force for all countries on that continent. 

85. The recent progress in the Middle East peace process gave room for greater optimism 
that a nuclear-weapon-free zone might be created in that region with corresponding Agency 
safeguards. Poland greatly appreciated the action taken by the Director General to implement 
the resolution adopted on that subject at the thirty-sixth session of the General Conference. 
The Agency should remain prepared to assist the States of the Middle East in implementing 
that resolution. 
86. The preparations for the 1995 NPT Review Conference were also progressing well. 
Poland hoped that the Treaty would be extended for an indefinite period, since it remained 
indispensable for the security of the States Party and the world at large. However, it was 
also necessary to engage in a thorough and meaningful discussion of its implementation, in 
particular of the clauses relating to nuclear disarmament and assistance in the field of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Expected progress with regard to the negotiation of a 
comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty and the provision by all nuclear-weapon States of 
categorical security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States should help ensure that the NPT 
Review Conference was a success. 
87. In that context, the problem of the implementation of the safeguards agreement 
between the Agency and the DPRK could not but be cause for concern, and Poland hoped 
that a positive and final solution would be found. The Polish delegation welcomed the results 
of the bilateral talks between the United States and the DPRK which had been held in 
New York and Geneva, but noted with regret that there was still no progress in the 
consultations which the DPRK had promised to hold with the Agency. He urged the DPRK 
to make sincere efforts, in consultation with the Agency, to find means whereby the 
safeguards agreement could be fully implemented, in accordance with the resolutions adopted 
by the Agency's Board of Governors and the United Nations Security Council. Such a move 
would be in the interests of the DPRK, other countries in the region and the world at large. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 25 

88. Poland was following closely and strongly supporting the preparations which the 
Agency was making to implement safeguards in those newly independent States of the former 
Soviet Union which had substantial nuclear programmes, not only because those activities 
concerned some of its neighbours, but also because the issue constituted a major nonproliferation 
problem. In view of the importance of the problem and the political and 
economic interests of the countries concerned, Poland urged those States to conclude 
comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency and to accede to the NPT. 
89. A cursory examination of the problems which the Agency was currently encountering 
in the safeguards area showed that there was a need to increase efforts considerably and to 
improve the efficiency and effectiveness of safeguards. Since, despite the scarcity of 
resources, a growing number of facilities were being placed under safeguards and the 
complexity of the technologies involved was increasing, it seemed reasonable to vary the 
intensity of verification efforts according to the significance of the facilities and the various 
parts of the nuclear fuel cycle from the point of view of non-proliferation. In that regard, 
the Agency and EURATOM should be congratulated on their new partnership approach, 
which aimed at increasing the efficiency of safeguards while at the same time making 
savings. The new safeguards approach required the provision of supplementary information 
in addition to the normal declarations concerning nuclear material, hence the importance of 
the information which was to be provided under the universal reporting system. Poland fully 
supported the latter, as it did the use of public domain information. 
90. Nuclear power plants currently in operation or under construction in the countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe had been subjected to safety reviews and evaluations during 
1992-93. Measures had already been taken and were still being taken to remedy the 
shortcomings which had been identified in those plants and in national nuclear regulatory 
systems. Poland thanked the donor countries, the Agency and the other international 
organizations for the assistance they had provided under that programme, in which Polish 
experts had also participated. The programme should be maintained, since a number of 
plants which had been in service for several years and where improvements had to be made 
to design and operational safety would continue to operate in those countries owing to the 
shortages in the national electricity generating systems. The development of a common basis 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 26 

for evaluating the safety of those plants and improvements to their safety systems would 
constitute the most important components of that assistance programme. 

91. A number of countries were currently re-examining and assessing their nuclear power 
programmes in order to address public concern in that area. The work which Member States 
were undertaking within the Agency on the preparation of an international nuclear safety 
convention, the examination of all aspects of the issue of liability for nuclear damage, the 
drafting of safety principles for future nuclear power plants and the development of a set of 
internationally agreed radioactive waste management standards was vital and should be 
viewed as a high priority. 
92. The majority of countries were only interested in non-power applications of nuclear 
energy. Protection of the environment was a field which was attracting ever-greater attention 
and to which, consequently, an increasing level of resources was being allocated in both the 
industrialized and the developing countries. That trend should be more widely reflected in 
the Agency's programme. For example, moves to use radiation technology to purify 
drinking water and waste water should be encouraged. 
93. Poland had always supported the Agency's technical co-operation programme and had 
contributed to and benefited from it. The External Auditor had suggested that technical cooperation 
projects should be harmonized more closely with national development plans. That 
proposal seemed to be in line with the model project approach which had been introduced 
by the Secretariat. That approach was a desirable one and should allow assistance to be 
focused on projects which had a greater impact on national development plans. The 
Agency's technical co-operation activities in Poland relating to the treatment of flue gases 
using electron beams could serve as a good illustration of that. A number of developing 
countries had expressed interest in that technology and had invited the Agency to prepare 
feasibility studies, taking into account experience acquired through international co-operation. 
94. His delegation welcomed the measures which had been introduced by the Secretariat 
to ensure harmony and compatibility between the Agency's programme and budget and 
accounts documents. As a result, a fourth annual document, the programme and budget 
performance report, had been added to the three traditional documents. However, those 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 27 

four documents should not, overall, be larger than the three original documents. As the 
Agency's budget had hardly increased at all in real terms in recent years, overheads should 
be reduced not increased. His delegation also appreciated the External Auditor's proposal 
from the previous year that the Secretariat should consider adopting a biennial budget, in 
consultation with Member States. 

95. Poland was grateful to the Agency for organizing an information seminar in Poland 
in June 1993 on nuclear energy and the environment, which had been aimed at 
representatives of the media, teachers, doctors and senior officials from governmental 
organizations. The media were still using information acquired during that seminar when 
they dealt with questions relating to nuclear energy. 
96. In conclusion, he congratulated the Director General on his reappointment and assured 
him that the Polish Government would continue to give him all the necessary support. 
97. Ms. MACHADO QUINTELLA (Brazil), noting that deep and rapid transformations 
were taking place in the world, said she hoped that that process would lead to a 
better and safer international society. In addition to the recent positive developments in the 
field of non-proliferation, there had been important political developments which, although 
not directly related to nuclear activities, helped to promote confidence and hence 
disarmament, including nuclear disarmament. Her delegation welcomed the agreement 
reached a few days previously by Israel and the PLO, which led one to believe that the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East was an objective within reach 
of the countries of the region. 
98. The decision by the United States, the United Kingdom, France and the Russian 
Federation to refrain from carrying out nuclear tests was another positive development which 
helped to prevent vertical nuclear proliferation. Her delegation firmly supported the 
negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty. It also welcomed the agreement announced 
between the Russian Federation and Ukraine concerning the control of nuclear weapons on 
Ukrainian territory, testifying to the resolve of the Governments of those countries to reduce 
tensions between them and contribute to the establishment of a safer world. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 28 

99. The destruction of nuclear weapons and reutilization of the nuclear materials in them 
for peaceful purposes was another topic of great interest. Like non-proliferation, 
disarmament also required verification and should be subjected to adequate international 
supervision. Although the Agency did not yet have a precise mandate with regard to 
disarmament, her delegation believed that it would have an important role to play in view 
of its experience and accumulated knowledge in verifying non-proliferation. 
100. Regional and subregional agreements on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, such as 
the Tlatelolco Treaty and the agreement between Brazil and Argentina, were an effective 
means of reducing tension and of promoting confidence and security and had the additional 
advantage of being adaptable to the characteristics and special needs of the geographical 
region to which they applied. Consequently, her delegation took a favourable view of 
initiatives aiming at the denuclearization of Africa and the Korean Peninsula. The Director 
General's report on the status of consultations with the DPRK concerning the implementation 
of the safeguards agreement between that country and the Agency was disappointing. 
Although recent developments were a cause of great concern, she remained hopeful that the 
issue would be resolved through dialogue and negotiation within the framework of the 
Agency. 
101. Her Government felt that it was advisable for all countries to adopt measures to 
control the export of sensitive technologies, equipment and material, especially those related 
to weapons of mass destruction. The Brazilian National Congress was considering 
comprehensive legislation to update existing rules, and regulations for its future application 
were under preparation. Related measures, but international in nature, were also under 
consideration. 
102. Her delegation was happy to announce that the agreement between Argentina and 
Brazil for the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy (INFCIRC/395) was fully in force 
and that ABACC, created under that agreement, was fully operational. Moreover, Brazil 
was in the final stages of the legislative process leading to ratification of the quadripartite 
agreement between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency and of the amended text of 
the Tlatelolco Treaty. Those two texts had been approved the previous week by the Brazilian 
Chamber of Deputies and were now before the Senate. As far as the quadripartite agreement 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 29 

was concerned, a very fruitful meeting had been held, as part of the negotiations on the 
subsidiary arrangements, in Rio de Janeiro from 8 to 10 September. Her delegation was 
convinced that the current negotiations would result in a document which fully reflected the 
quadripartite agreement and would enable ABACC to exercise its responsibilities under that 
agreement. Consolidation of ABACC to establish it as a sound and internationally respected 
agency would contribute to the rational application of Agency safeguards in Brazil and 
Argentina. 

103. The strengthening of the Agency's safeguards had always been of interest to Brazil 
and it therefore welcomed the progress already achieved in that respect, largely based on 
suggestions made by SAGSI. While supporting efforts to strengthen the safeguards system, 
her delegation considered it essential that decisions be taken by consensus and that, when 
examining any issue related to safeguards, consideration also be given to views other than 
those expressed within SAGSI. 
104. An adequate balance between the Agency's safeguards and non-safeguards activities 
was vital. Developing countries must be able to draw increasing benefit from the Agency's 
technical co-operation programmes. There was no incompatibility between the Agency's 
technical co-operation and its non-proliferation mandate. Programmes of interest to 
developing countries should be encouraged and receive full financial support from the 
Agency. 
105. Nuclear safety was another area worthy of special attention. Her delegation was 
looking forward to the outcome of negotiations to establish a nuclear safety convention which 
laid down fundamental principles and which was inspired, as far as possible, by the Agency's 
NUSS codes. The objective should be to improve international safety standards. Her 
delegation had already indicated that it believed that the scope of that convention should be 
limited in the first instance to nuclear power reactors. 
106. The Brazilian Government had recently ratified the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage, which had entered into force for Brazil on 26 June 1993, and 
was following with interest work related to revision of that Convention by the Standing 
Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage. With respect to supplementary funding, her 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 30 

delegation thought that a regional approach, taking into account the characteristics of each 
region, was the appropriate solution. 

107. The new Basic Safety Standards currently under preparation should be of a purely 
advisory nature and it should be up to each State to decide whether to adopt them. 
108. She was pleased to note that the Agency's financial situation had improved over the 
current year. She welcomed the efforts being made by the Secretariat to comply with the 
resolution on harmony and compatibility of the Agency's programme and budget and 
accounts documents. Such harmony and compatibility would enable the Member States to 
have a clearer picture of the Agency's administration and of its financial needs. In order to 
contribute to the full implementation of the Agency's 1992 programme, Brazil planned to pay 
its contribution for the preceding year that week. In view of the high amount of Brazil's 
annual contribution and the country's difficult economic situation, that constituted a major 
effort. 
109. The Agency had complex and important duties to carry out. To do so, it needed the 
full support of its Member States and highly qualified staff. Her Government was convinced 
that the developing countries could help the Agency recruit competent staff. She urged the 
Director General to intensify his efforts to recruit experts from developing countries and, 
above all, female experts. 
110. International security had developed into a complex issue. Her Government was 
following the matter closely and was ready to help eliminate or reduce the associated 
tensions. It was firmly committed to disarmament, to the elimination of weapons of mass 
destruction and to non-proliferation. She reiterated, however, that the guarantees asked of 
Brazil, and of other countries, should in no way curtail their chances for development. 
111. In conclusion, she said that there was hope for a better world in which the spectre of 
nuclear confrontation would become a thing of the past. Member States should work 
together to banish that spectre and ensure a brighter future for the coming generations. 
112. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia), noting with satisfaction the improved harmony and 
compatibility of the annual report and the Agency's programme and budget and accounts 
documents, said that he looked forward to further progress to enhance the programme's 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 31 

transparency. His delegation, therefore, endorsed the Agency's annual report and accounts 
for 1992 as well as the budget for 1994. 

113. Despite financial difficulties, the Agency had carried out its functions in an efficient 
and effective manner. It was encouraging to note the substantial progress made in 1992-93, 
especially in the field of safeguards. Malaysia, which was party to the NPT and had 
concluded a full-scope safeguards agreement with the Agency, supported efforts to strengthen 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system and reiterated its full 
support for the measures taken by the Director General to that end. He commended the role 
played by the Agency in the denuclearization efforts in Africa and hoped that it would make 
similar efforts with a view to establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and 
in South East Asia. He urged Member States to co-operate fully in the implementation of 
safeguards agreements. He congratulated the Republic of Armenia on concluding such an 
agreement pursuant to the NPT and called on other Member States which had not yet done 
so to follow that example. With regard to the financing of safeguards, the current 
arrangements seemed to be the most appropriate at present. 
114. He was pleased that the Agency had also made efforts to improve the efficiency of 
its technical assistance activities as part of measures to achieve an adequate balance between 
its safeguards and other activities. The delay in preparing and presenting the document 
concerning non-safeguards activities was, however, regrettable. 
115. The model project approach was a very good way of increasing the impact of the 
technical co-operation programme. The number of model projects should be increased and 
equal opportunity given to all Member States to participate. In addition, assistance aimed 
at enhancing the ability of developing countries to use nuclear energy should continue to be 
strengthened. 
116. Efforts were also being made in Malaysia to make better use of research and 
development results and to ensure the transfer of technology from the research institutions 
to the end-users. The priority needs of Member States and those of the Agency should, 
consequently, be compatible. The commitments undertaken by his Government, together 
with the support provided by the Agency, had enabled Malaysia to make tremendous progress 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 32 

in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Current efforts were being focused on 
nuclear energy applications in industry, particularly in non-destructive testing, nucleonic 
control systems, tracer techniques and radiation technology. Some research results were 
already being exploited commercially. Encouraging progress had also been made in the use 
of analytical and tracer techniques to study and solve pollution problems. Nuclear medicine 
was another area in which Malaysia would continue to strengthen its activities. 

117. Malaysia fully realized that the strengthening of technical co-operation activities 
required increased resources. It was therefore concerned that resources allocated to the 
technical co-operation programme had been declining recently. Two measures to overcome 
that situation should be considered: one was timely payment of pledges and the other was 
to share resources, expertise and experience more effectively amongst developed and 
developing countries. In that connection, Malaysia pledged US $70 200 as its share of the 
TACF target for 1994 and was prepared to provide fellowship training in the field of nuclear 
science and technology for non-power purposes for scientists from other developing countries 
in competent institutions in Malaysia. It also wished to encourage and further strengthen the 
links between those institutions and their counterparts in developed and developing countries, 
either on a bilateral or a regional basis. In addition, it would continue to host some of the 
Agency's activities in future. 
118. Malaysia was grateful to the Agency for its assistance, including assistance within the 
framework of the RCA, which had helped it to make progress in nuclear science and 
technology, and was also grateful to developed countries in its region, such as Australia and 
Japan, for the strong bilateral arrangements that had been established. It appreciated the 
measures taken by the Agency in connection with the various resolutions to strengthen 
international co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection. It also 
commended the Agency's implementation of the resolution on the revision of the Basic Safety 
Standards for Radiation Protection which had been adopted at the thirty-sixth session of the 
General Conference. It attached great importance to nuclear safety and radiation protection 
and had always supported activities in that field. Recently, it had hosted a regional workshop 
on the application of the 1990 ICRP recommendations, which had given the region the 
opportunity to learn about the latest developments in radiation safety principles and concepts 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 33 

and become familiar with the regulatory requirements. It had been suggested that a followup 
workshop on a similar subject be held in two to three years' time to enable an exchange 
of information on the results obtained and the problems encountered in applying the 
1990 ICRP recommendations. 

119. Turning to waste management, he welcomed the Agency's initiative to provide 
Member States with information on how to resolve waste management problems and 
reaffirmed the importance of sound practices for the safe management and disposal of 
radioactive waste. 
120. With regard to the transport of radioactive material, he reiterated Malaysia's 
standpoint that the routing of radioactive material and toxic wastes should avoid densely 
populated areas and busy waterways. Malaysia also appreciated early notification of 
shipments of such material. 
121. With respect to the amendment of Article VI of the Agency's Statute, his delegation 
supported the move to re-establish the working group to review the issue as a whole and 
looked forward to the outcome of the group's deliberations. 
Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) resumed the Chair. 

122. Mr. WALKER (Australia) said that over the past year satisfactory progress 
had been made on a number of issues that fell within the Agency's purview. At the same 
time some international events continued to confront the Agency with serious challenges, 
while other recent events could well provide it with unparalleled opportunities to participate 
in and help shape future global and regional security arrangements. 
123. The Australian delegation noted with satisfaction that the global nuclear nonproliferation 
regime had been strengthened by the increasing international recognition of the 
crucial importance of guaranteeing the effectiveness of the NPT and its indefinite extension 
in 1995. It was particularly pleased to note that, with the recent new accessions, the Treaty 
now numbered 160 States Party. The accession of the new members had served to reinforce 
the importance of the Treaty for global security and as a basis for peaceful nuclear cooperation. 
South Africa's willingness to disclose its past nuclear activities had been a further 
example of the normative force of the NPT and of the rigour of the Agency's safeguards. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 34 

Australia would encourage all Agency Member States which had not yet acceded to the NPT 
to reconsider the benefits of accession. An effective non-proliferation regime was a 
necessary support for nuclear disarmament. To join the regime was the single most effective 
action a non-nuclear-weapon State could take to contribute to nuclear disarmament and also 
to promote peace in its own region. Australia urged, in particular, Ukraine and Kazakhstan 
to act swiftly to fulfil the obligations they had undertaken under the Lisbon Protocol to the 
START I Treaty and to accede to the NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States. 

124. It remained a matter of serious concern to Australia that two countries - Iraq and the 
DPRK - were not complying with their obligations under the NPT and under their safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. It was regrettable that Iraq's failure to implement fully the 
relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions would be a focus of attention at the 
General Conference for the third consecutive year, and his delegation again called upon that 
country to take the steps necessary to discharge its obligations under those resolutions. 
125. The DPRK's failure to co-operate with the Agency in the implementation of its 
safeguards agreement - which had forced the Board in April of that year to conclude that it 
was not complying with its obligations - was unquestionably the most disturbing proliferation 
issue to emerge since the previous session of the General Conference. The DPRK's activities 
posed a serious threat to the cause of nuclear non-proliferation and to the Agency's 
safeguards system, as well as to security and stability on the Korean Peninsula and in Asia 
and the Pacific. Australia earnestly hoped that the DPRK would make a sincere effort to 
resolve its differences with the Secretariat and would move in the near future to a position 
of full compliance with its international safeguards obligations. 
126. Over the past few years, Australia had actively encouraged the Board of Governors 
and the Secretariat to examine new measures aimed at maximizing the Agency's ability to 
detect undeclared facilities. It welcomed the Board's formal endorsement of a reporting 
scheme to provide additional information on exports and imports of specified equipment and 
non-nuclear material. That measure would add significantly to the Agency's knowledge of 
production and transfers in the nuclear field. Australia was pleased to have been 
participating in the trial period of that scheme and intended to continue its involvement. All 
Member States should consider doing likewise at the earliest possible date. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 35 

127. The report that SAGSI had recently submitted to the Director General merited careful 
study by all Member States. It was clear that ways had to be found of reducing costs while 
at the same time meeting new requirements and maintaining effectiveness. He wished to 
commend SAGSI for its report, which set very useful parameters for further consideration 
of that crucially important issue. He was pleased to announce that the Australian 
Government was holding discussions with Agency officials on the possibility of testing some 
of SAGSI's proposals, including environmental monitoring and extended access, at the 
Australian national nuclear reactor complex at Lucas Heights in New South Wales. He 
hoped that other Member States would participate in similar trials to ensure that future 
important decisions on the direction of safeguards could be based on sound knowledge and 
experience. Experience from developing countries would be particularly valuable. 
128. Australia was pleased to note that the Nuclear Suppliers Group had incorporated into 
its guidelines a policy requiring full-scope safeguards as a condition for significant new 
nuclear supply. That was a response to the concerns on that matter that had been expressed 
so clearly by numerous States at the Fourth NPT Review Conference. The fact that, when 
it resumed work in January, the Conference on Disarmament would begin by negotiating, 
as a matter of urgency, a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty was another encouraging 
prospect. That had been one of Australia's long-standing disarmament goals and his 
Government had warmly welcomed recent developments. There had been mention of the 
possibility that the Agency might contribute to the verification of a test ban. Australia would 
like to see that idea thoroughly explored and it was pleased that the Agency had been invited 
to participate in the Conference on Disarmament to discuss its possible role in that area. 
129. The end of the Cold War had brought an opportunity for the early negotiation of a 
convention banning the production of fissile material for weapons purposes, something that 
was the subject of a long-standing United Nations General Assembly resolution. There 
would no doubt be widespread interest in the Agency's providing assistance in the discussions 
and negotiations on that matter. It was clear that, through its safeguards system, the Agency 
would assume responsibility for the verification functions under such a convention. 
130. The subject of excess civil plutonium stocks and fissile material from dismantled 
nuclear weapons was continuing to attract extensive international attention. His Government 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 36 

believed that the Agency had a role to play in that area. Since the questions involved were 
a matter of concern to many Member States, there should be an opportunity for wider 
discussion of the issues and of such concepts as the international management of plutonium. 

131. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that his Government attached the utmost importance 
to the need for compliance with the most rigorous standards in the design and operation of 
nuclear facilities. Accordingly, his Government endorsed the Agency's involvement in 
nuclear safety activities designed to address the needs of broad categories of Member States. 
In particular, it supported the activities that the Agency and Member States were conducting 
in the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union, but it believed that those 
activities had to be properly co-ordinated if they were to be fully effective. While it was 
understandable that the focus should be on Eastern Europe, the attention given to safety 
issues in other regions should not be neglected. 
132. Australia had supported the proposal for the drafting of an international nuclear safety 
convention and had participated from the outset in the work of the group of experts convened 
by the Agency to examine the possible content of such a convention. His Government urged 
all countries to recognize the importance of the early and satisfactory conclusion of those 
negotiations. 
133. Likewise, Australia continued to support the work on the revision of the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage. It was important that the largest possible 
number of countries should participate actively and constructively in the eighth session of the 
Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage so that an agreement on State liability 
and supplementary funding could be reached. 
134. Australia remained a firm supporter of the Agency's technical assistance activities. 
Despite currency fluctuations, it had continued to pay in full its assessed voluntary 
contribution to the TACF. It supported a dynamic technical assistance programme that 
brought tangible advantages to the intended beneficiaries. His Government, which would 
contribute 1.3 million Australian dollars to the TACF in 1994, urged all Member States to 
take seriously their obligations to help finance the Agency's technical assistance activities. 
That was in the interest of all Member States, donors and recipients alike. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 37 

135. During the previous year, Australia had hosted and funded two Agency regional 
training courses and had provided places for more than 40 Agency fellows in such fields as 
nuclear medicine, radiation protection, the production and control of radiopharmaceuticals, 
and the production of isotopes. As part of a three-year programme of extrabudgetary 
assistance under the RCA, Australia was supporting a project involving the application of 
distance learning techniques in the fields of radiation protection and nuclear medicine. In 
addition, it had provided extrabudgetary funding for a co-ordinated research programme on 
the use of nuclear techniques in retrospective studies on coral reefs. It also intended to host 
a course - the third such one in ten years - on national systems of accounting and control in 
May 1994. 
136. At its recently concluded meeting, the South Pacific Forum had recognized that some 
of its island Member States were unable, owing to a lack of infrastructure, to join 
international bodies such as the Agency. The Forum had agreed to begin negotiations on a 
regional instrument that would cover various forms of wastes and complement existing global 
regimes, specifically the Agency's Code of Practice on the International Transboundary 
Movement of Radioactive Wastes. Along with other members of the Forum, Australia was 
working to promote the adoption, under Article XVI.A of the Agency's Statute, of an 
arrangement under which the Pacific Island States would receive the protection accorded by 
the Agency's Code of Practice. His delegation also wished to draw the Conference's 
attention to document GC(XXXVII)/INF/330, which had been submitted at the request of 
Australia, New Zealand and the Marshall Islands and in which sections of the communique 
of the twenty-fourth South Pacific Forum dealing with various nuclear matters were 
reproduced. 
137. On the question of nuclear activities at the national level, he said that at the beginning 
of the year the United Kingdom and Australia had agreed on measures to decontaminate the 
former British nuclear test site at Maralinga in South Australia. His Government had 
informed the Agency of developments on that issue, in accordance with the provisions and 
spirit of its safeguards agreement. 
138. Under the direction of the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, 
Australian scientists had participated in a number of major international scientific projects. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 38 

Intensive contacts had been pursued under co-operation arrangements with CERN and various 
organizations in other countries. His delegation believed that the main challenge facing the 
Agency was to work effectively, within its budgetary constraints, to maintain the credibility 
of the safeguards regime. 

139. Australia was aware of the particularly difficult financial situation faced by the 
Agency in the previous two years, and for that reason it again called on all Member States 
to make prompt and full payment of their assessed contributions to the Regular Budget. 
Australia had also made a number of proposals in the Board of Governors aimed at reforming 
the processes involved in the formulation and management of the Agency's programme and 
budget. Those proposals were intended to ensure the availability of sufficient funds for the 
Agency's priority activities. In that context, one could not emphasize enough that, unless 
all Member States paid their assessed contributions on time and in full and unless steps were 
taken to carry out a constructive review of programme priorities, the Agency would simply 
no longer be able to fulfil its mandate. In that connection, his country welcomed the 
Secretariat's efforts to present the Annual Report for 1992 on the basis of a programmerelated 
rather than an administrative structure. 
140. In conclusion, he noted that the 1990s were a decade of radical change in the world's 
political landscape. That situation presented the Agency with unprecedented opportunities 
to participate in and help shape global and regional security arrangements. Moreover, 
nuclear technology still had a great potential for improving the quality of life. It was 
important therefore to seize those opportunities so as to ensure that the Agency would 
contribute to the fullest extent possible to the security, prosperity and general well-being of 
mankind. 
141. Mr. ZILLER (Germany) said that the year which had passed since the previous 
session of the General Conference had been marked by several events which demonstrated 
once again that there was still a need for vigorous efforts in order to rid the world of the 
nuclear threat. 
142. The complete elimination of Iraq's weapons of mass destruction continued to be a goal 
of great importance. The Security Council had charged the Agency with that task, to be 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 39 

carried out in close co-operation with the United Nations Special Commission for the 
Disarmament of Iraq. His country congratulated the Agency and the Special Commission 
on their successful work. The German Government had contributed to that success by 
providing important financial, logistic and expert support. Nevertheless, the work had not 
yet been completed. There still seemed to be a possibility that the Iraqi Government would 
resume its nuclear weapons programme. It was still not fully complying with its obligations 
under Security Council resolutions 707 and 715. Germany appealed to it once more not to 
continue refusing to comply fully with the Security Council resolutions, and urged it to start 
co-operating at last with the Agency's Action Team and the Special Commission in a spirit 
of openness and confidence, and to use Iraq's considerable industrial potential for exclusively 
peaceful purposes to the benefit of the Iraqi people. 

143. The continued non-compliance of the DPRK with its obligations under the NPT and 
its safeguards agreement with the Agency was giving rise to very serious concern. Germany 
welcomed the fact that, following bilateral consultations with the United States Government, 
the DPRK had suspended its decision to withdraw from the NPT and had again entered into 
consultations with the Agency. In order to avoid any misunderstanding on the part of the 
DPRK, however, it should be stated clearly that compliance with binding legal commitments 
established by the Board of Governors and confirmed by the Security Council was not a 
matter for negotiation. That would undermine the credibility and effectiveness of the 
safeguards system as a whole. 
144. The control mechanisms and decision-making procedures provided for in that system 
had proved to be effective. Germany commended the Director General and his staff for their 
competent, diligent and impartial handling of what was a difficult and sensitive case. In the 
interests of peace and security in the region and worldwide, it therefore urged the DPRK to 
comply fully with its obligations under the NPT and its safeguards agreement and to reverse 
definitively its decision to withdraw from the NPT. 
145. In accordance with a unanimous decision of the German Parliament, his Government 
remained strongly committed to striving for universality of the non-proliferation system and, 
at the same time, to strengthening its effectiveness, particularly in the field of nuclear 
safeguards. Germany was concerned that there were several countries with major nuclear 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 40 

programmes and activities still outside the non-proliferation and safeguards system. It 
particularly urged those successor States of the former Soviet Union which were not yet 
parties to the NPT to accede without delay as non-nuclear-weapon States. That would open 
the way for full-scale commercial and industrial co-operation, which was urgently needed in 
order that the safety of nuclear facilities in those countries might be enhanced. In that 
context, the agreement reached at the meeting between the Presidents of the Russian 
Federation and Ukraine on the future of the nuclear weapons on Ukrainian territory was of 
great importance. 

146. Germany welcomed the measures taken by the Director General and the Board to 
strengthen the Agency's safeguards system, particularly with regard to the carrying out of 
special inspections and the establishment of a universal reporting system - which was so far 
being applied only on a voluntary basis by a number of countries. Germany urged all of the 
Agency's Member States to adhere to the system in order to increase transparency in 
international nuclear transfers and domestic production. Also, it looked forward to new 
proposals by the Director General, particularly with regard to the problem of undeclared 
nuclear facilities and activities. 
147. In view of the need to make sure that the Agency had sufficient resources to cope 
with its many new tasks, Germany had noted with satisfaction that it had been possible to 
achieve important savings by bringing the Agency's inspection effort in the European 
Community countries down to a level equivalent to the effort deployed under comparable 
circumstances in other parts of the world. Given the important progress made some months 
before, his country hoped that it would soon be possible to implement a true "partnership 
approach" in the co-operation between the Agency and EURATOM. 
148. With regard to the Agency's other main functions, he reiterated his delegation's strong 
support for the Agency's very valuable activities in the field of nuclear safety. In particular, 
the German Government appreciated the extensive and competent efforts to improve the 
safety of nuclear installations in Central and Eastern Europe and the CIS. There had been 
important progress in the implementation of international support programmes and 
mechanisms, but that had not yet led to technical safety improvements of the required extent. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 41 

149. Considerable progress had been made in the negotiations on a nuclear safety 
convention. Such a convention, entering into force as soon as possible and signed by the 
greatest possible number of countries, would make a significant contribution to the 
improvement of nuclear safety worldwide. However, it was still difficult to see which States 
with nuclear installations would ultimately be prepared to accept the text now being 
formulated. It was very much to be hoped that the text would be presented to a diplomatic 
conference early in the following year. 
150. Mr. TALIANI (Italy) said that he associated himself with the statement made 
by the delegate of Belgium on behalf of the European Community and its member States. 
He would therefore confine himself to a number of remarks reflecting a more strictly national 
point of view on some matters concerning his country in particular. 
151. First of all, the Director General was to be congratulated on his reappointment. 
Mr. Blix had carried out his role with great success, to the satisfaction of all Agency 
Member States, and Italy looked forward to continuing to work with him during the next four 
years. Also, his country welcomed the States that had shortly before been approved for 
membership of the Agency and hoped that they would ratify the Statute soon, together with 
those countries approved for Agency membership the previous year which had not yet done 
so. It was important that that obligation be met in order that the States in question might 
participate fully in the Agency's activities. 
152. Italy attached the utmost importance to the great progress made in the field of nuclear 
disarmament, particularly through the signing of START-I and START-II. As a result of 
such agreements, a denuclearization process had begun in the countries of the former Soviet 
Union and, in line with the policy followed by other members of the G-7, Italy had 
negotiated an agreement under which technical assistance would be provided to the Russian 
Federation in that connection. His country considered the dismantling of nuclear weapons 
in the former Soviet Union to be a key contribution to the strengthening of international 
peace and security. 
153. The recent announcement by some nuclear-weapon States of the extension of the 
moratorium on nuclear testing and the decision taken in Geneva to mandate the Ad Hoc 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 42 

Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban to negotiate, in 1994, a global nuclear test ban were signs 
of movement in the right direction. 

154. In that regard, the NPT remained a cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime; it had been demonstrating its effectiveness for almost 25 years. Italy was therefore 
looking forward to the 1995 Review Conference and advocated an indefinite and 
unconditional extension of the NPT. Non-proliferation issues were of central importance for 
the General Conference, and they had been addressed by the Presidency of the European 
Community. He would simply like to emphasize that his country would spare no effort to 
strengthen and extend the non-proliferation regime, both in time and in space. 
155. His delegation was pleased with the results of the 21 inspection missions to Iraq 
carried out by the Agency so far and looked forward to the completion by the Agency of the 
task assigned to it in Security Council resolution 687, and particularly to the early 
implementation of the long-term verification plan. It called on Iraq to comply with its 
obligations and to provide the Agency with the necessary information on its procurement 
sources, which it had so far refrained from doing. 
156. It was gratifying to note that in 1992 the Secretariat had not detected any event 
indicating a diversion of a significant quantity of safeguarded nuclear material for nonpeaceful 
activities or for purposes unknown. 
157. Italy had adhered with conviction to the universal reporting policy of the European 
Community, which the Agency was now implementing, albeit with more limited scope and 
participation, as a scheme for export-import notification; it appealed to other countries to 
follow its example in order that the scheme might become truly universal and to provide the 
Agency with comprehensive information on all transfers of nuclear material and equipment. 
158. Welcoming the results of SAGSI's work on the strengthening and rationalization of 
the safeguards system, he said that in his delegation's opinion it should be accompanied by 
efforts to identify ways of reducing the costs of the system. In order to strengthen 
safeguards while enhancing their credibility, the Agency might delegate a number of activities 
to regional systems while retaining final responsibility in the field of verification. His 
delegation would like a study to be made in the near future on the possibilities of establishing 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 43 

direct links between the Agency and regional systems, drawing on the impressive example 
of EURATOM and its partnership approach. 

159. Turning to nuclear safety and radiation protection, he recalled the importance which 
his Government attached to the Agency's work in that field, to which absolute priority should 
be given. Nuclear safety and public perceptions regarding nuclear power remained at the 
heart of the nuclear debate both in Italy and at the international level. 
160. The lengthy negotiations on the drafting of an international convention on nuclear 
safety seemed to have reached a turning-point thanks to the willingness of many delegations 
to compromise. Nevertheless, it was now necessary to concentrate on a number of essential 
points, such as the peer review system and the role of the Agency, in order to ensure that 
the convention was implemented effectively. The recommendations of INSAG on the matter 
represented a useful contribution in that connection. There would also have to be a clear 
commitment to a broadening of the scope of the convention as soon as possible. Italy was 
ready to co-operate fully in reaching a rapid agreement along those lines. 
161. At the same time, the importance should be emphasized of the specific Agency 
mechanisms - the effectiveness of which had been demonstrated over the years - for the 
strengthening of nuclear safety and the enhancement of co-operation among Member States. 
Despite all their limitations, which his delegation had referred to on various occasions, those 
mechanisms - for example, the OSART, ASSET and IRRT services and the IRS - represented 
an achievement which ought to be not only preserved, but also consolidated. 
162. Mention should also be made of the work that lay ahead in dealing with the risks, in 
countries of the former Soviet Union, associated with the low safety levels of nuclear 
facilities and the radioactive contamination of large areas. Similarly, it was necessary to 
tackle the problem of the dumping of radioactive waste in Arctic seas and the Sea of Japan. 
163. Italy, which was playing an active role in the programme agreed at the Munich 
Summit to enhance reactor safety in countries of Central and Eastern Europe and of the CIS, 
welcomed the progress made in the implementation of that programme and the contributions 
made by the institutions concerned. Moreover, it hoped that there would be a continuation 
of the dialogue between, on one hand, the countries involved and, on the other, the World 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 44 

Bank, the EBRD and the Agency with a view to the formulation of energy strategies for 
those countries, account being taken of the priority need to shut down the highest-risk 
reactors as soon as possible. In keeping with what had been stated recently at the Tokyo 
Summit, Italy agreed that it was necessary to make rapid improvements to those facilities 
whose safety levels were a source of great concern and to give priority to the strengthening 
of independent regulatory bodies. It would continue to contribute to the success of the 
programme, both directly and within the framework of the G-7's working group on nuclear 
safety. 

164. The Agency's financial situation was a matter for concern. In the planning of the 
budget, greater account should be taken of the capacity of Member States to pay their 
contributions. In addition, more funds should be earmarked for nuclear safety. In that 
regard, there should be a more selective approach in the identification of planning goals so 
as to ensure that all Agency activities in the field of safety were financed from the Regular 
Budget, rather than from uncertain voluntary contributions. 
165. Italy was pleased to inform the General Conference that, following endorsement by 
the Board of Governors in February, the agreement on the administrative restructuring of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics had been signed by the Agency, UNESCO and 
the Italian Government. The agreement was now before the Italian Parliament. 
166. In expressing its sincere gratitude to Professor Salam for his dedication at the helm 
of the Centre for so many years, his delegation noted that a new Director would have to be 
appointed in the near future. Italy would continue to support that important institution, both 
financially and in other ways. It was proud to have contributed substantially to the creation 
and development of an international institution which had proved to be a particularly effective 
tool for the transfer of science and technology to developing countries. 
167. In conclusion, he said that his country looked forward to being a member of the 
Board in 1993-94. Italy's position on the question of a revision of Article VI of the Statute 
as a whole was an important element in its attitude towards the Agency. It hoped that future 
reports of the working group concerned with that question would contain suggestions 
regarding new opportunities for countries which were not permanent members of the Board. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 45 

168. Mr. TSOUNIS (Greece) associated himself with the statement which had been 
made by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the European Community and its 
12 member States, but said that he wished to make a number of additional comments. 
169. He endorsed the Agency's Annual Report for 1992 and congratulated the Secretariat 
on its good work and the results it had achieved despite the Agency's budgetary constraints 
and financial difficulties. 
170. The Agency's Member States could not fail to be gratified by the successful 
implementation of technical assistance programmes, the handling of new problems related 
to safety and safeguards, the Agency's participation in activities to ensure the safety of 
nuclear facilities in Eastern Europe and the worldwide recognition of the Agency's role in 
the field of non-proliferation. However, the new political era of the 1990s, which was so 
different from the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s, had opened up new horizons. The Director 
General was being called upon to face the challenges of the 1990s and to respond efficiently 
to the changing needs of Member States. At the beginning of his new four-year term of 
office, Greece expected that the Director General would proceed to shape new ideas and 
review plans in order to meet the challenges of the coming era. Nuclear energy, nuclear 
safety and nuclear non-proliferation had already entered into a new phase. 
171. Greece was following the Agency's nuclear safety activities with increasing concern. 
He welcomed the progress which had been made with the provision of assistance to Member 
States and the analysis, in collaboration with other interested countries, of the shortcomings 
of Soviet-designed pressurized water reactors such as the RBMK. Greece continued to be 
interested in those activities, particularly those relating to the WWER-440/230 reactors at the 
Kozloduy plant. The close co-operation between the Agency, the CEC and the NEA/OECD 
on the provision of technical and financial support to the States of the former USSR and the 
countries of Eastern Europe with a view to improving nuclear safety was especially 
important. He also welcomed the collaboration between the Agency and the UNDP aimed 
at helping those countries to resolve problems related to safety and radiation protection. 
172. Greece was collaborating closely with the Bulgarian authorities. In the preceding 
year, it had organized a course on the planning of emergency interventions in the event of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 46 

a nuclear accident. A similar course was also planned for October of the current year, with 
the financial support of the European Community. The Director of the Greek Atomic Energy 
Commission, accompanied by his technical advisers, had visited the Kozloduy plant as part 
of the existing bilateral agreement between the two countries. He had also initialled, together 
with the Director of the Romanian National Commission for the Control of Nuclear 
Activities, a co-operation agreement on early notification in the event of a nuclear accident 
and on the exchange of information. The Greek Atomic Energy Commission and the United 
States Nuclear Regulatory Commission had signed a similar agreement on the exchange of 
information and co-operation in the field of nuclear safety. 

173. Nuclear facilities in Greece had joined forces with medical physics departments in 
Greek universities to establish an intensive two-year training programme for specialists in 
radiation physics. Radiation protection teaching programmes had also been set up for 
dentists. 
174. With regard to the nuclear safety convention, Greece had taken part in the 
deliberations of the working group on that issue and was of the opinion that there was an 
urgent need to improve general nuclear safety standards throughout the world. He thanked 
the chairman of the working group and the competent staff of the Secretariat who had helped 
with the redrafting of the convention, taking into account the working group's views. The 
latter had recently reached a compromise over the scope of the convention. Although Greece 
was of the opinion that the convention should cover all aspects of nuclear facilities, it 
endorsed the compromise reached in the current draft, which limited the scope to civil 
nuclear power plants. That compromise had been accepted by the various parties on the 
understanding that negotiations would be initiated on an international instrument on the safety 
of waste facilities as soon as the safety fundamentals for that type of facility had been agreed 
upon. The convention should encourage full technical co-operation with the Agency and 
promote transparency and public information. The report which had been drawn up by 
INSAG in July at the request of the Director General also merited serious study by the 
working group during its forthcoming meeting in October. He hoped that the working group 
would complete its work soon so that the diplomatic conference could take place at the 
beginning of 1994. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 47 

175. Greece had also taken part in the deliberations of the Standing Committee on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage. He hoped that that Committee would soon produce a 
document for consideration by the political authorities. While he supported the Committee's 
work, he hoped that the question of supplementary funding would be resolved satisfactorily 
and that the Committee would be able to address the issue of State liability within the desired 
space of time. 
176. Nuclear non-proliferation and the Agency's safeguards system were inseparable and 
played a major role in ensuring peace and security in the world. Greece reaffirmed its firm 
commitment to the NPT, which was the most widely accepted international instrument in the 
field of arms control and disarmament. Despite its weaknesses and limitations, the Treaty 
should be maintained in the years to come and extended for an indefinite period. However, 
the capacity of reactors in operation was continuing to increase and the amount of spent fuel 
and plutonium subject to safeguards was steadily growing. In addition, confronted as it was 
with the problems caused by the end of the Cold War, the existence of facilities which were 
not subject to safeguards in certain countries, the complexity of the system, increased 
resistance in certain isolated cases and the lack of adequate financial resources, the Agency 
was experiencing greater difficulty in performing its safeguards tasks. Nevertheless, it had 
so far managed to carry out its activities without encountering any major obstacles. As far 
as it was able, it continued to provide the international community with the assurance that 
material and equipment which had been declared to it remained in peaceful uses. It had been 
able to verify the inventory of South Africa and the destruction of the latter's nuclear 
weapons programme. It had performed inspections in Iraq and implemented the main 
elements of the plan for the destruction, removal or rendering harmless of the items listed 
in Security Council resolution 687. It had instituted a new partnership approach with the 
CEC for the implementation of safeguards in the European Community. The crucial work 
of S AGSI aimed at developing improved monitoring techniques and reinforcing the efficiency 
and effectiveness of the Agency's safeguards system had continued. Greece was looking 
forward with interest to a more systematic in-depth study of the measures envisaged by 
SAGSI and other technical groups of the Secretariat prior to the Board's discussions in 
December. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 48 

177. Some obstacles to the application of the Agency's international safeguards system had 
been identified. The DPRK's refusal to allow Agency inspectors full access to its facilities 
was the most serious of those. The system could not function correctly if that State did not 
co-operate with the Agency. As long as co-operation was hampered, the Agency could not 
carry out its activities and could therefore not provide the assurance, required by the 
commitments which the DPRK had undertaken under the NPT and the safeguards agreement, 
that nuclear facilities and material had not been diverted to non-peaceful purposes. Greece 
hoped that the DPRK would allow the Agency to continue as soon as possible with the 
application of proper safeguards. The DPRK's recent reaction was extremely disappointing 
and regrettable. He hoped that the DPRK would allow the planned inspection of nuclear sites 
on its territory. The gravity of the matter made it necessary to discuss the issue at the 
General Conference and to notify the Security Council promptly. 
178. Non-proliferation objectives were also served through regional initiatives. Greece had 
already noted the initiation of such measures and looked forward to further similar 
developments in various regions of the world. The historic progress which had recently been 
made in the Middle East gave grounds to hope that safeguards might also be applied in that 
region. He was sure that the Director General would pursue consultations with the States 
in the region with a view to promoting the swift application of comprehensive safeguards in 
the Middle East and, in particular, with a view to preparing model agreements as an initial 
step towards the setting up of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region in accordance with 
resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/601. He was convinced that the States in the region would soon 
be ready to discuss the terms of a non-proliferation regime in that part of the world. 
179. He commended the Agency on the efforts it had made to date to implement Security 
Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715, but regretted the fact that Iraq had not yet provided 
detailed procurement and supply information. He urged Iraq not to continue to withhold that 
type of information and to co-operate more closely with the Agency with a view to 
normalizing its relations with the organization responsible for the promotion and control of 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy. He also hoped that the monitoring programme would 
soon be implemented in Iraq. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 49 

180. The aim of the Agency's technical co-operation activities was to assist Member States 
in need and to make them autonomous in the fields of nuclear energy, science and 
technology. Greece both contributed to and benefited from technical assistance and thought 
that the Agency was achieving its objectives in assisting Member States, within the 
limitations of the financial resources available to it for that purpose. Greece had always paid 
its contribution to the Regular Budget and its voluntary contribution to the TACF in full. 
It also paid its share of the assessed programme costs, which were valuable since those funds 
eventually became part of resources available to the Agency for the provision of assistance 
to developing Member States. 
181. Greece welcomed the new Member States of the Agency and expressed the hope that 
they would all work together to promote harmonious co-operation among all Member States 
in the nuclear field. 
182. Mr. COOK (New Zealand), having welcomed the new Member States of the 
Agency, said that recent sessions of the General Conference had taken place against the 
background of dramatic change and that the 1993 session was no exception. The end of the 
Cold War and the increased dangers of nuclear proliferation presented fresh challenges to the 
Agency. 
183. He noted that 1993 had seen the start of the process leading to the review and 
extension of the NPT in 1995. New Zealand believed that that Treaty, and particularly 
Articles HI and IV dealing with safeguards and technical co-operation, underpinned the entire 
non-proliferation structure. There would, therefore, be interaction between the review and 
extension process and developments within the Agency in those two key areas. His country 
had gone on record as supporting indefinite and unconditional extension of the NPT, which 
would further strengthen the Agency's role. The Director General had noted ways in which 
international changes might extend that role in future. It had been suggested that the Agency 
should participate in the verification of a possible comprehensive test ban. New Zealand 
believed that that idea deserved further examination. A stop to the production of fissionable 
material for weapons purposes would be another major contribution to international 
disarmament, and the Agency might be able to play a constructive role in implementing and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 50 

verifying such a ban. A further task which the Agency should address was the need for 
secure handling and storage of plutonium from dismantled nuclear weapons. 

184. The greatest challenge, however, remained the threat of nuclear proliferation. The 
lessons learned from recent experience were clear. Confidence in the international nonproliferation 
regime could exist only when countries were completely transparent about their 
nuclear activities. Full co-operation with the Agency, which administered the nuclear nonproliferation 
regime on behalf of the international community, was essential. The Agency's 
right to conduct special inspections where necessary must be upheld. The support of the 
Security Council might prove necessary as a last resort. Furthermore, New Zealand 
considered that all Member States had a responsibility to supply the Agency with relevant 
information - including national intelligence information - which might help improve the 
effectiveness of its safeguards operations. 
185. His delegation commended the Agency on its continuing work in implementing the 
Security Council resolutions on Iraq. While invaluable work had been done in identifying 
and dismantling Iraqi nuclear facilities, the provision of essential procurement and supply 
information was still outstanding. New Zealand urged Iraq to provide that information in the 
near future. 
186. While the proliferation threat from Iraq had been checked, there was growing concern 
about a country in the Asia and Pacific region, namely, the DPRK. Throughout 1993, there 
had been repeated calls for the DPRK to resume full compliance with its safeguards 
obligations. It was most regrettable that a solution to that impasse still seemed as far away 
as ever. For its part, New Zealand fully endorsed the resolutions adopted by the Board. It 
did not accept the criticisms levelled by the DPRK at the Agency with regard to impartiality; 
on the contrary, it considered that the Director General and Secretariat had acted entirely in 
accordance with the responsibilities entrusted to them by the international community. It 
rejected the proposition that legal commitments assumed under a safeguards agreement were 
in any way negotiable. His country was therefore concerned that the DPRK had not only 
failed to take the necessary steps to clarify the inconsistencies in its nuclear inventory, but 
that it was now placing obstacles in the way of even the routine and ad hoc inspections 
required to ensure the continuity of safeguards data. It was entirely appropriate for such an 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 51 

issue to be considered at the General Conference. New Zealand hoped that the clearly 
expressed views of Member States would prompt the DPRK to reconsider its position. 

187. In other areas progress had been more encouraging. South Africa's announcement 
that it had abandoned its nuclear weapons programme had been a victory for nonproliferation. 
New Zealand was pleased that the Agency's inspections had revealed nothing 
to suggest that that programme had not been fully dismantled. It welcomed the prospect of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, which now appeared to be an attainable goal. 
188. New Zealand had warmly welcomed the PLO-Israel agreement. A wider regional 
peace settlement could pave the way for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 
New Zealand commended the initiatives taken by the Director General in that regard, 
including the workshop organized in Vienna in May. 
189. Those proliferation problems demonstrated the limits of the existing safeguards 
system. New Zealand fully endorsed the steps that were being taken as a matter of urgency 
to make safeguards more effective and efficient. It believed that the SAGSI 
recommendations were a major step forward. It favoured the examination of new approaches 
and techniques to facilitate the detection of undeclared installations. Furthermore, it agreed 
that routine inspection activities could be reduced through such methods as increased cooperation 
with State systems of accounting and control. New Zealand also regarded the new 
universal reporting scheme on exports and imports of nuclear material as a useful confidencebuilding 
measure. Although its involvement in such transfers was insignificant, it would 
participate in the scheme as an indication of its support. 
190. While the Agency was rightly seeking to introduce new measures to make safeguards 
more cost-effective, his country was concerned that continual financial problems had 
impaired the Secretariat's ability to fulfil all its tasks. In the past, New Zealand had pointed 
out some inequities in the burden imposed by the present safeguards funding system on States 
with no nuclear programmes. It was all the more important, therefore, that Member States 
- particularly those with significant nuclear activities - should pay their budget contributions 
promptly. In 1993, New Zealand had once again made a modest extrabudgetary contribution 
to the Agency's safeguards programme. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 52 

191. While the safeguards programme was a major priority, New Zealand recognized the 
importance of other areas of the Agency's work - particularly the transfer of technology. 
Although his country's capacity to contribute to such programmes was limited, New Zealand 
scientists had been able to help provide training and technical input in areas in which they 
had appropriate expertise. 
192. The preparatory work for conventions on nuclear safety and liability for nuclear 
damage were also of interest to his country. New Zealand produced no nuclear power itself, 
but felt that countries which did operate nuclear reactors should apply the highest possible 
safety standards. Similarly, not only States with nuclear activities, but also those without, 
were concerned by the issue of liability and compensation for possible nuclear damage. 
New Zealand looked forward to early progress in both series of negotiations. 
193. His country was also worried about nuclear waste management. The dumping of 
nuclear waste at sea in his own region was already prohibited by the Rarotonga Treaty. 
New Zealand was actively supporting the adoption of an amendment to the London 
Convention of 1972 to bring about a total ban on the dumping of radioactive waste at sea. 
It welcomed the conclusions of the IGPRAD report on that subject. Its concern was shared 
by its Pacific neighbours and had been clearly expressed in the South Pacific Forum 
communique in August 1993. New Zealand supported the Agency's important work in that 
area, such as the International Arctic Seas Assessment Project and the RADWASS 
programme. 
194. In conclusion he said that, in the present period of transition, it was more necessary 
than ever to keep the dangers of nuclear proliferation at bay and that New Zealand was ready 
to contribute to that task. 
195. Mr. WALKER (Canada) noted that now, more than ever, world attention was 
focused on the important role that the Agency was expected to play in ensuring the safe use 
of nuclear energy and in supporting the NPT, particularly during the period leading up to the 
NPT Review Conference scheduled for 1995. The global political climate had changed, 
presenting new opportunities as well as fresh challenges. He was confident that the Agency 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 53 

would have no problem in meeting those challenges under the able leadership of the Director 
General, whom he wished to congratulate on his re-election. 

196. During the past year, the Agency had been confronted with some new, disquieting 
challenges to the integrity of the system it supported, notably on the part of Iraq and the 
DPRK. However, those events proved that an international organization was in the best 
position to deal with problems of that kind. The Canadian Government strongly supported 
the Agency's non-proliferation and safety objectives and encouraged those countries that had 
not yet acceded to the NPT or accepted full-scope safeguards to do so. In that way, all 
countries could contribute to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. As 
concerns about environmental protection and sustainable development emerged, nuclear 
energy was called upon to become an ever more widely used energy source. 
197. Given the disquiet that had arisen regarding safeguards and the status of nuclear 
power programmes throughout the world, it was worthwhile reflecting for a moment on the 
Agency's role as set forth in its Statute. The Canadian Government believed that the 
changed global circumstances made such reflection all the more necessary. It was customary 
to draw a distinction between the Agency's "promotional" activities, on the one hand, and 
its "regulatory" activities, meaning essentially safeguards, on the other. Canada believed that 
that distinction remained valid. However, in view of the current status of nuclear power and 
possible future developments, it was now appropriate to distinguish, among the Agency's 
promotional activities, between the promotion of the safety of all nuclear installations, 
including the management of radioactive waste, on the one hand, and the promotion of the 
many applications of nuclear technology in the fields of food and agriculture, human health, 
water resources, environmental studies and industrial applications, on the other. 
198. Over the past decade there had been an increase in the number of Agency 
programmes dealing with safety. To some extent that increase had been accompanied by a 
corresponding decrease in the emphasis on the Agency's traditional nuclear power 
programmes. That trend appeared to be a clear reflection of Member States' needs. The 
current situation was very different from the situation prevailing at the time when the Agency 
was established. The number of countries, particularly developing countries, that were now 
seriously considering embarking on nuclear power programmes was significantly smaller than 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 54 

it had been 20 or 30 years before. The paramount need at the moment was to ensure that 
all nuclear activities were conducted safely. That need was underscored by the current 
situation in the States of the former Soviet Union and the countries of Central and Eastern 
Europe. Against that background, the Agency was in a good position to play a meaningful 
role, particularly by offering safety-related services and by acting as the principal forum for 
the sharing of safety-related information. 

199. Canada was not suggesting that the Agency should become an international regulatory 
authority, but that it should continue to play a useful role in facilitating the exchange of 
safety-related information. It was in fact achieving that objective through the organization 
of expert group meetings, workshops, and projects for the provision of safety services and 
the development of manpower, without however limiting itself to those activities. Canada 
was proposing that the Agency's basic mission be refocused so that it would rest on the 
following three "pillars": firstly, safeguards - involving the establishment and maintenance 
of an effective and efficient system of safeguards; secondly, safety - involving the 
implementation of programmes aimed at ensuring the safety of all nuclear installations; and 
thirdly, technology transfer - involving the implementation of programmes aimed at 
transferring to developing Member States appropriate nuclear technologies in the fields of 
power generation, radioactive waste management, food and agriculture, human health, 
environmental studies and industrial applications. 
200. In elaborating on those three areas, he noted first of all, with respect to safeguards, 
that Canada attached great importance to the strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system 
as part of the nuclear non-proliferation effort. That was the aim of SAGSI, whose advice 
the Director General had requested concerning initiatives for strengthening and streamlining 
safeguards. The Group had proposed a number of innovative ideas along those lines. In 
accordance with SAGSI's interim conclusions and recommendations, Canada agreed that the 
Agency's safeguards, which at present were a purely quantitative system based on material 
balance accounting, should include the detection of undeclared activities and facilities. 
Different models existed for providing the Agency with that type of capability; all relied on 
increased transparency, on an improvement in the Agency's capability to process information, 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 55 

and on acceptance of additional safeguards activities. Canada had offered itself as a venue 
for the testing of some of those ideas. 

201. His country believed that priority should be given to ways of detecting undeclared 
activities that contravened non-proliferation undertakings, and especially to the provision of 
resources and mobilizing of the collective will to ensure total respect for the inspection rights 
that were inherent in the Agency's Statute, but not explicitly set out in individual safeguards 
agreements. 
202. States that had accepted full-scope safeguards should recognize that the Agency had 
a legitimate right of access at any time to nuclear installations, whether or not they had been 
declared, and to any other site for the purpose of verifying the absence of undeclared 
activities. The world might have to accept a slightly higher price for the strengthening of 
international peace and security that would result from the application of a truly effective 
safeguards regime. 
203. In the second place, one of the Agency's key functions must be to continue to 
organize programmes to promote the safety of all nuclear facilities. There would be a 
readier public acceptance of nuclear energy if it were possible to demonstrate that all nuclear 
activities were safe. In that connection, the safety of Soviet-designed nuclear reactors had 
become a major international concern. Canada believed that the Agency's programmes 
dealing with that matter were of fundamental importance. By way of complementing those 
efforts, his Government was formulating with the Russian Federation a bilateral programme 
entitled the Canadian Nuclear Safety Initiative. It also strongly supported other multilateral 
efforts aimed at addressing those concerns and was looking forward to an early conclusion 
to the negotiations on a nuclear safety convention. It was to be hoped that a similar 
instrument could be developed to deal with the problem of radioactive waste management. 
204. In the third place, technology transfer traditionally involved the identification of 
needs, the transfer of skills and equipment, and the modernization of institutions so that 
nuclear technology, appropriately applied, might meet the needs of Member States in various 
areas. At the forthcoming meetings on the Medium Term Plan, the Canadian delegation 
would be taking the position that it was vital that the transfer of technology should proceed 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 56 

in a way that respected the principles of sustainable development. In that context, his 
delegation wished to emphasize that it was important that the technical assistance programme 
should adopt a country programme approach and take into account the lessons learned from 
the evaluations of the projects in progress. Canada looked forward to the Agency's reaction 
to those recommendations and to those of the External Auditor. 

205. It was essential to maintain a balance in the Agency's various activities and his 
delegation believed that the Agency had succeeded in striking a proper balance between its 
activities and the different needs and concerns of Member States. At the same time, his 
delegation recognized the need for a flexible approach capable of responding to urgent 
problems. Particularly in view of the budgetary constraints, all Member States should 
endeavour to take a broad overview of the Agency's activities instead of focusing solely on 
issues of particular interest to them. It should also be kept in mind that the Agency had an 
important contribution to make to the NPT review process, given its paramount role as the 
custodian of the safeguards arrangements and its mandate to promote the use of nuclear 
technology for peaceful purposes. 
206. In the light of the current situation with respect to non-proliferation, the Canadian 
Government was absolutely convinced that the Agency had a decisive role to play in the 
control of material originating from dismantled nuclear weapons and believed that the Agency 
should move quickly to place that material under safeguards. Although the recent reductions 
in nuclear arsenals were encouraging, the problem of safeguards had yet to be settled 
definitively. Canada believed that the security interests of all the members of the 
international community made it imperative that there be every possible assurance that such 
material was not being diverted or misused. Through its safeguards system, the Agency was 
in a position to provide that assurance. Similarly, the establishment of an international 
system for the management of plutonium would also constitute an important confidencebuilding 
measure. His delegation was looking forward to a report from the Director General 
on the technical discussions currently in progress on that subject and suggested that that item 
be placed on the agenda of future sessions of the General Conference. 
207. In conclusion, he noted that it would become increasingly difficult to separate 
completely the Agency's different activities. Safeguards, safety and technology transfer were 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 57 

all important and interconnected areas. It was up to each Member State to advise the Agency 
on how best to approach those subjects, taking into account the new demands and the 
activities in progress. Moreover, the time had come to re-examine the Agency's involvement 
in certain extremely useful development activities that, given the scope they had acquired, 
might perhaps be more appropriately pursued on an industrial scale. The Medium Term Plan 
would be useful in that regard, and the Canadian delegation would examine it with those 
objectives in mind. 

208. Mr. AL-SALAMI (Observer for Yemen), welcoming the new Member States 
of the Agency, said that he was certain that the increase in the Agency's membership would 
contribute to the efforts to promote peace and security in the world. 
209. The Cold War of the last few decades had hampered the process of the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons and had prevented the less developed or newly independent 
countries from generating the resources required for their development programmes and from 
meeting the basic needs of their peoples. 
210. He was convinced that the policies of the Cold War would soon yield to those of 
detente and co-operation and that if more States acceded to the NPT, the developing countries 
would be able to obtain the support and assistance they needed in order to draw maximum 
benefit from the progress achieved in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in other areas 
conducive to national development. 
211. The experience of recent decades had underscored the importance to developing 
nations of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which could compensate for a shortage of 
conventional energy resources, or provide an alternative to them, enabling those countries 
to meet their growing energy requirements. Nuclear energy also had important applications 
in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
212. In that context, the Agency was playing an increasingly important role through its 
nuclear safety, technical assistance and safeguards programmes, under which it was 
contributing to strengthening confidence and co-operation between Member States, to 
promoting peace in the world, to accelerating the development process in developing nations, 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 58 

and to ensuring a balance between the developed countries of the North and the developing 
countries of the South. 

213. Many countries in the South were still grappling with the after-effects of colonization 
and resulting economic and social constraints that were being further aggravated by the 
population problem. Those difficulties were reflected in the inhuman, abject and insecure 
living conditions of their people. Co-operation was essential therefore in order to meet the 
basic needs of those countries' populations in terms of food, health care and social services. 
Specialized international agencies could help those countries to develop and diversify their 
energy resources for use in the economic, social and cultural sectors. Yemen urged the 
Agency to prevail upon international and regional organizations and the industrialized States 
to support the transfer and promotion of technology in developing countries. 
214. Nuclear energy had become essential for raising output and improving quality in 
agricultural, animal and industrial production and also had applications in the development 
of applied sciences such as medicine. 
215. Since all States with nuclear programmes were represented in the Agency, it was in 
a particularly good position to mobilize resources, find new methods, strengthen nuclear 
safety measures, monitor the production and use of nuclear source material, and ensure the 
safe disposal of nuclear waste. 
216. Co-operation between the Agency and its Member States should be intensified in view 
of the practical and legal importance, not only at the national level but also at the regional 
and international levels, of implementing the decisions and resolutions of the Agency's 
policy-making organs. In that way, the Agency would be able, in co-operation with national 
authorities, to draft, conclude and implement international agreements and arrangements with 
a view to the widest possible application of regulations and guidelines governing nuclear 
safety, safeguards and the disposal of radioactive waste. 
217. He noted with concern the gravity of the difficulties of water and food supply in some 
of the least developed countries, especially on the African continent and in Yemen's own 
region of South West Asia, and expressed his apprehensions about the serious economic, 
social and health-related consequences that might ensue. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 59 

218. As one of the countries most affected by drought and the depletion of groundwater 
reserves, Yemen was counting on the Agency's assistance in finding the most advanced and 
least costly techniques for groundwater prospecting or for the use of nuclear energy in the 
desalination of sea water so as to make it suitable for human consumption and use in 
agriculture. 
219. His delegation welcomed the peace negotiations in the Middle East and hoped that 
they would lead to positive and tangible results. It also welcomed any effort that would lead 
to declaring the Middle East a region free of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear 
weapons. 
220. He called upon the Director General to continue his consultations with a view to 
implementing the General Conference's resolutions on the Middle East, the application of 
safeguards, radiation protection, nuclear safety and the safe disposal of radioactive waste. 
221. While commending the Agency's efforts to overcome the difficulties of financing the 
various activities under its programmes, he emphasized that all Member States should meet 
their financial commitments. He was confident that the Agency would be able not only to 
increase its resources, but also to distribute them in a balanced way among its various 
activities, according due priority to technical assistance and research contracts. 
222. As one of the world's poorest countries, with its national existence and development 
still affected by the consequences of the Cold War at the international and regional levels, 
Yemen hoped to be able to improve its infrastructure and to acquire a sound physical base 
that would enable it to profit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing its 
resources. 
223. Yemen had already taken most of the steps required for membership of the Agency. 
It hoped to be accorded priority in obtaining technical assistance and to receive the necessary 
support for establishing a national body to be responsible for devising systems and methods 
for the peaceful use of nuclear energy and for co-ordination and co-operation with the 
Agency and with national and regional organizations. 
224. Mr. ORTAKOVSKI (Observer for the former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia) thanked the Agency for having admitted his country among its Member States. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 60 

Having co-operated with the Agency in the past as part of the former Yugoslavia, his country 
was aware of the Agency's role in stimulating science and providing technical assistance, and 
of its capabilities for collecting, systematizing, developing and transmitting knowledge and 
experience related to the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Now, as an independent State, his 
country was endeavouring, as before, to preserve peace and was making every effort to 
overcome a difficult situation. It was convinced that closer co-operation with the Agency 
would help it to achieve that end. 

225. The admittance of his country to membership of the United Nations, after being made 
to wait 15 months, had given his country the hope that it would be possible to avoid the 
outbreak or spread of conflicts on its territory. As an advocate of economic development 
through scientific research, and concerned to promote parliamentary and multiparty 
democracy, his country was firmly determined to remain outside all conflicts, to help prevent 
war in the Balkan region and elsewhere, and to endeavour to find a peaceful solution to the 
current disputes in the interests of stabilizing the political situation beyond its borders. 
Acting in accordance with its policy in favour of peace, his country had succeeded in 
breaking out of forced isolation by becoming a member of a number of specialized 
organizations and agencies of the United Nations system, including the Agency. The help 
that the latter would be able to make available to it in applying nuclear technology in the 
fields of food and agriculture, human health, industry, research and technical co-operation 
would be of great value to his country. 
226. Mr. SPETSIOS (Greece) took the floor to say that, following the statement of 
the preceding speaker, the Greek delegation wished to draw the General Conference's 
attention to the fact that, in accordance with its resolution of 27 September 1993 (document 
GC(XXXVII)/1083), it had been decided that the State represented by the preceding speaker 
was to be provisionally referred to, for all purposes within the Agency, as the "former 
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia", pending settlement of the difference that had arisen over 
the name of that State. 
227. Mr. FEU ALVIM (Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials) recalled that Argentina and Brazil had signed, on 18 July 1991 in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 61 

Guadalajara (Mexico), an agreement, which had come into force on 12 December 1991, on 
the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy. 

228. The Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials, 
which had been established to monitor compliance with that bilateral agreement, had as its 
main objectives the administration and application of the Common System of Accounting and 
Control of Nuclear Materials (SCCC), a full-scope system aimed at verifying that the nuclear 
material used in any nuclear activities was not being diverted to purposes prohibited under 
the agreement. 
229. Since both countries had already placed nuclear materials under Agency safeguards 
at many nuclear facilities, the ABACC Secretariat had decided to assign priority to 
safeguarding nuclear materials subject only to the SCCC system. Mentioning a few of the 
operations conducted by ABACC, he said that it had already inspected 45% of the facilities 
listed in the initial inventory and that it hoped that verifications would have been carried out 
at all the installations by the end of the year. Arrangements had been made for the 
destructive analysis of nuclear material samples, and a programme for certifying several 
laboratories was under way in both countries. In addition to the two seminars for inspectors 
that it had organized in 1992, ABACC had recently sponsored a special training course for 
inspectors and had scheduled another for 1994. Other tasks had involved the establishment 
of databases, the calibration and maintenance of equipment, and the preparation of seals. 
230. In December 1991 in Vienna, Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency had signed 
a quadripartite agreement on the application of safeguards. The basic provisions of that 
agreement, which had not yet come into force, were the acceptance by the States Parties of 
safeguards covering all nuclear materials in all nuclear activities; verification to ensure that 
nuclear material had not been diverted to military purposes; the right and obligation of the 
Agency to ensure that safeguards were being applied; and the application by ABACC of its 
own safeguards and its co-operation with the Agency under the terms of the agreement. The 
agreement also provided that the States Parties, ABACC and the Agency were to endeavour 
to avoid any unnecessary duplication of effort in their activities. Recalling the different 
negotiations that had been held on the subject of subsidiary arrangements between the four 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.356 
page 62 

parties, he said that it was possible that a final agreement would be reached by the end of 
November 1993. 

231. Once the quadripartite agreement entered into force, it would be possible to integrate 
the regional system managed by ABACC into the international system co-ordinated by the 
Agency. It was ABACC's view that regional safeguards systems would play an increasingly 
important role in nuclear non-proliferation policy. Those regional systems were effective 
because they were based on the principle of "neighbours watching neighbours". Regional 
safeguards agencies would therefore not be reduced either to playing a purely passive role 
or to serving as an information intermediary between the participating countries and the 
Agency. The ABACC safeguards system had been implemented taking into account the entry 
into force of the quadripartite agreement, so that that system was compatible with the 
Agency's own system. 
232. The protocol that was part of the quadripartite agreement provided that the Agency 
and ABACC were to arrive at their own conclusions independently, while co-ordinating their 
activities so as to avoid duplication of effort. Although the ABACC system was independent 
and provided access to more in-depth information than the Agency's system, it was not 
intended that it should compete with the Agency's system, but rather that it should 
complement it. Moreover, it would be the Agency's task to evaluate the effectiveness of the 
ABACC safeguards, and he hoped that, in the near future, it would also assume 
responsibility for checking and certifying the quality of the regional systems. 
233. At a time when safeguards effectiveness was being strengthened, regional agencies 
like ABACC could help to enhance that effectiveness with a view to reducing considerably 
any regional motivations that might exist for building a nuclear device. 
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
12 November 1993 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 24 September 1993, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
Later Mr. ZAITSEV (Russian Federation) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

8 
General debate and annual report for 1992 
(continued) 1- 186 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Mexico 1 - 17 
Switzerland 18-35 
Denmark 36-55 
Turkey 56-73 
Finland 74-97 
Sudan 98 - 103 
Israel 104- 118 
Spain 119- 137 
Holy See 138 - 142 
Chile 143 - 161 
Indonesia 162 - 179 
Marshall Islands 180 - 186 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-3759 (IV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 


page 2 

Abbreviations used in this record 

AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 
Technology in Latin America 
ASEAN Association of South East Asian Nations 
ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
EURATOM European Atomic Energy Community 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
GNP Gross national product 
ICRP International Commission on Radiological Protection 
INES International Nuclear Event Scale 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
PLO Palestinian Liberation Organization 
RADWASS Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
RAP AT Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SAGSI Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
START Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
TACF Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco 
Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
WANO World Association of Nuclear Operators 
WHO World Health Organization 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (continued) 

1. Mr. HELLER ROUASSANT (Mexico) said that the past year had been an 
exceptional one from the point of view of safeguards. The Board of Governors had, for the 
first time, requested a special inspection, on account of inconsistencies found by Agency 
inspectors in the initial report provided by the DPRK. That event had, regrettably, led to 
doubts about the international non-proliferation system based on the NPT. His Government 
had welcomed the DPRK's decision to suspend its withdrawal from the NPT, and he hoped 
that the DPRK Government would continue consultations - both with the Agency and with 
the countries directly concerned - with a view to finding a satisfactory solution to the nuclear 
issue and to promote the rapid denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. His delegation 
hoped that examination of the matter by the General Conference would help ensure the 
continuation of safeguards in the DPRK and verification of the DPRK's initial report by the 
Agency. 
2. With regard to the strengthening of safeguards, the Board of Governors had, at its 
February 1993 meetings, decided to establish a universal reporting system for nuclear 
material and specified equipment and non-nuclear material; also, a study had begun of 
initiatives proposed by SAGSI. Efforts to modify the safeguards system had - to a 
considerable degree - been triggered by the fact that a Member State had not fulfilled its 
obligations and by the problems arising from the fact that it had so far proved impossible to 
verify the completeness of the DRPK's nuclear inventory, the Agency focusing its efforts on 
the creation of a new safeguards system - preventive in nature - which would permit the 
identification of undeclared nuclear facilities. His delegation felt that such exceptional 
developments should not be allowed to unduly influence the exercise in which the Agency 
was engaged, since a safeguards system based on total lack of confidence ran the risk of 
calling into question the integrity of all States. Nevertheless, his Government fully 
recognized the need to strengthen the safeguards system and make it more effective, with the 
essential proviso that the measures adopted to that end be binding, universal, nondiscriminatory 
and set in an appropriate legal framework. 
3. Accordingly, his delegation was interested in some of the SAGSI proposals described 
in document GOV/2657. It believed that they could be implemented once the necessary legal 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 

page 4 

framework had been established and there had been an in-depth study of their technical, 
financial and political implications. His delegation shared the view that there was a need for 
a forum in which Member States could conduct detailed and comprehensive negotiations 
regarding the safeguards system and consider the creation of a complementary legal 
framework to accommodate the new elements agreed to by those States in the interests of 
strengthening the Agency's safeguards. He therefore supported the idea of establishing a 
committee open to all Member States along the lines of the Safeguards Committee (1970), 
which had formulated the material reproduced in document INFCIRC/153 (Corrected). That 
would enable Member States to undertake a continuous and in-depth study of the subject, and 
the Board of Governors would no longer have to engage in sporadic discussions of halfmeasures 
which were increasingly voluntary in nature and less and less universal. 

4. Such a committee would have to be given a specific mandate and a target date for the 
completion of its work. The target date might well be 1995 - the year of the NPT Review 
and Extension Conference. The aim should be to create a truly universal system which 
complemented both the one based on document INFCIRC/153 and the one based on 
document INFCIRC/66/Rev.2. 
5. There was an urgent need to think about the question of compliance with those 
obligations entered into by States under NPT which were directly related to Agency 
activities. That would contribute to the preparations for the 1995 NPT Review and Extension 
Conference, to the strengthening of all the Agency's activities and to the timely drafting of 
the documents which the Agency would submit to the Conference. 
6. In recent years, the countries which were suppliers of nuclear material, equipment and 
technology had increased export restrictions by broadening the scope of the London 
Guidelines, thereby undermining the principles contained in Article IV of the NPT, under 
which all the Parties undertook to facilitate the fullest possible exchange in co-operation with 
other States or with international organizations. The Agency was the appropriate multilateral 
body for carrying out the promotional activities foreseen in Article IV of the NPT. 
7. The nuclear Powers had had a quarter of a century, since the adoption of the NPT, 
to demonstrate to the international community their willingness to fully comply with the aims 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 5 

set forth in the preamble to Article VI of the Treaty: nuclear disarmament and general and 
complete disarmament. Now, in the post-Cold War era, they should make every effort to 
do so as soon as possible. In that connection, the Agency might play an important role in 
the application of safeguards to the nuclear material derived from the disarmament process. 

8. The Agency might also become involved in the system for verifying compliance with 
a possible complete nuclear test ban treaty. His delegation recognized the importance of the 
unilateral nuclear weapons testing moratoria declared by the United States, the Russian 
Federation, France and the United Kingdom and hoped that all the nuclear Powers would 
abide by such moratoria in the interests of creating an international climate conducive to 
multilateral consultations on a nuclear weapons ban treaty. The entry into force of START I 
and START II would mean a significant reduction in nuclear weapons. Mexico hoped that 
all the republics of the former USSR would ratify the NPT and bring it into force as soon 
as possible. 
9. His delegation welcomed South Africa's unprecedented decision to renounce nuclear 
weapons, to destroy the nuclear weapons already developed by it and to support the initiative 
for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. 
10. His delegation hoped that the experience gained through the Tlatelolco Treaty would 
serve as a frame of reference for denuclearization in other parts of the world, particularly 
Africa and the Middle East. With Dominica's recent accession, the Treaty now had 25 full 
Parties, and Mexico was sure that the countries of the region for which the Treaty was not 
yet in force would accede to it soon and thereby consolidate the nuclear-weapon-free zone 
envisaged in Article IV of the Treaty. On 10 September 1993, his Government had 
deposited the first instrument of ratification of the amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty which 
had been approved by the OPANAL General Conference in August 1992. 
11. In the view of his delegation, which had taken part in the meetings of the Group of 
Experts for the drafting of a nuclear safety convention, such a convention would help greatly 
to enhance the safety of nuclear power plants in much of the world. While the convention 
should ideally embrace all nuclear facility types, including fuel cycle facilities, his country 
could go along with its initial restricted application to civil nuclear power plants, on the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 6 

understanding that the preamble contained a commitment to the subsequent inclusion of other 
facility types once basic safety principles had been accepted by international consensus. He 
reiterated his country's firm belief that the responsibility for nuclear safety should remain 
with competent national authorities. 

12. His Government welcomed the Agency activities aimed at enhancing the safety of 
nuclear facilities. The Agency's services should be provided only at the request of Member 
States, however, and the costs of providing them should be met from the Regular Budget. 
13. The process of revising the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
had not made as much progress as his delegation would have liked, and he hoped that all 
countries participating in the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear 
Damage would make every effort to enable a diplomatic conference on the matter to be 
convened in 1994. 
14. Mexico fully subscribed to the principle that the benefits of the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy should be accessible to all States which had made a legally binding 
commitment to non-proliferation and had accepted the application of safeguards to source and 
special fissionable materials. Those States had a right to participate in the broadest possible 
exchange of scientific and technical information relating to such applications. The Agency 
should therefore do more in the way of providing the materials, services, equipment and 
facilities necessary for promoting - throughout the world - nuclear power generation and the 
practical application of nuclear energy in agriculture, health, industry and scientific research. 
15. Mexico wished to participate actively in the planning, implementation and evaluation 
of model technical co-operation projects which focused on the needs of the final users and 
which were closely linked to national and sectorial development plans. His delegation 
welcomed the initiative taken by the Department of Technical Co-operation to identify and 
support such projects. 
16. The difficult financial situation of the Agency had become chronic. A pragmatic 
review of its activities from the point of view of efficiency and effectiveness was necessary 
in order to avoid duplication and waste. Evaluation was crucial for determining the real 
impact of projects. A strategic framework was essential for defining the main directions of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 7 

Agency activity; the 1995-2000 Medium-Term Plan could serve as such and should be 
developed on the basis of extensive consultations between the Secretariat and Member States. 

17. Finally, it was essential to analyse the political changes taking place in the world and 
their impact on the Agency, the developments in the field of nuclear technology taking place 
in various Member States and the impact of the activities of the Agency on its Member 
States - all factors which should be reflected in the Agency's policy-making organs, and 
particularly in the composition of the Board of Governors, to ensure that the Agency kept 
up with the times and was able to face the challenges of the coming millennium. 
18. Mr. KIENER (Switzerland) said that among the various noteworthy events of 
the past year, two had been particularly serious: the non-compliance of the DPRK with its 
safeguards obligations and the announcement by the DPRK of its intention - later suspended to 
withdraw from the NPT. 
19. As a Member State of the Agency and a party to the NPT, Switzerland firmly 
believed that the DPRK should meet those obligations and allow the Agency to carry out its 
safeguards task to the full. His country was convinced that that would be in the interests 
both of the international community and of the DPRK. 
20. In March, South Africa had disclosed that it had had a military nuclear programme. 
South Africa's invitation to the Agency to visit all the sites which had been involved in the 
programme had been a welcome gesture. 
21. At its annual meeting in Lucerne (Switzerland), the Nuclear Suppliers Group had 
reaffirmed the importance of its guidelines on trade in nuclear-related goods and technology 
for the nuclear non-proliferation regime. The members had agreed that the guidelines should 
be amended so as to require the application of Agency safeguards to all current and future 
nuclear activities as a condition for significant new supply undertakings vis-a-vis non-nuclearweapon 
States. The Group had once again appealed to supplier countries which had not yet 
adopted such a policy to do so as speedily as possible. 
22. Switzerland was concerned about the Agency's financial situation in respect of both 
Regular Budget and TACF contributions. Member States should pay their dues without 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 8 

delay, and those Member States which had pledged TACF contributions should honour their 
pledges. 

23. The year before, Switzerland had called upon the Agency to co-operate with those 
countries which had considerable experience of safeguards in order to make the system more 
effective and keep costs under control. In that connection, he recalled that in 1995 the Board 
of Governors had to submit to the General Conference a recommendation on the financing 
of safeguards which took into account the financial impact of the safeguards implementation 
measures then in force. By that time, some of the present measures would have been 
modified and new procedures would have been introduced, but beforehand the measures and 
procedures in question would have to be tested and their cost implications assessed. The two 
matters were linked, and there was no time to lose. 
24. What were the Agency's objectives in that connection? Did it want to do a little 
better by making an extra effort? In his delegation's opinion, broadening the present system 
by extending safeguards procedures was not the right approach; nor was it necessarily useful 
or appropriate to perfect the present procedures to the point where all radioactive materials 
could be recorded and tracked. Such efforts, particularly in respect of States parties to the 
NPT, would merely provide further confirmation of transactions which were known or which 
conformed to the prescribed rules: they would not reveal any clandestine transfers. The 
Agency should consider reducing its substantial routine inspection effort, which related to 
declared materials without direct military significance unless enrichment or separation had 
taken place. Why should it not focus its efforts on fuel cycle facilities, which presented the 
greatest risks of diversion and were the natural crossroads in the movement of materials? 
25. Nuclear safety was another important field of Agency activity. In 1991, when it had 
been decided to start the process of drafting a nuclear safety convention, Switzerland had 
thought that the task would soon be completed; the technical experience gathered over a 
period of 40 years was available, and all that needed to be done was to demonstrate that the 
basic principles of nuclear safety were known and recognized by the experts. 
26. However, for various reasons that had little to do with the substance of the matter, 
the process had not advanced as far as it might have. Nevertheless, a first draft was likely 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 9 

to appear the following month, and he hoped that it would be acceptable to all. While his 
delegation agreed with the idea of having initially a convention restricted to nuclear power 
plants, it believed very strongly that an extension to cover nuclear waste should not be 
delayed. 

27. He hoped that those first two parts of the envisaged nuclear safety convention would 
soon be open for signature by States, for it was important not to give the public the 
impression that fruitless discussions were preventing agreement on the basic safety principles. 
28. With regard to reactors in central Europe and countries belonging to the 
Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS), his delegation was pleased that work on 
enhancing their safety was proceeding well. International effort had brought about substantial 
improvements. The Agency was assisting the regulatory authorities of the countries 
concerned, thereby complementing the efforts of Member States, the European Community, 
WANO and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
29. A great deal of work had been carried out already, but much remained to be done. 
In that connection, he was pleased to convey his Government's decision to contribute 
S.Fr. 200 000 in support of the programme on RBMK safety. 
30. As regards the nuclear energy situation in Switzerland, in 1992 the Miihleberg nuclear 
power plant had undergone major renovation and been subjected to a thorough examination 
by the safety authorities, with a view to obtaining a renewal of its operating licence and 
authorization to increase the power level by 10%; as a result, the Government had granted 
the authorization. That had given rise to strong protests from environmental organizations, 
which had decided to withdraw from the discussions being conducted with a view to 
achieving a consensus on nuclear waste. 
31. The painful conflict about nuclear energy had thus been reactivated. Environmental 
organizations had renewed their demands for the abandonment of nuclear power generation 
while maintaining their demands for a reduction of CO2 emissions. They were clinging to 
the idea that the latter goal could be achieved merely through the rational use of energy and 
the development of renewable energy sources, and they would not relinquish their opposition 
to the construction of hydroelectric power plants. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 10 

32. Despite the results of the United Nations Conference on Environment and 
Development (UNCED - held in Rio de Janeiro) and the efforts being made to develop safer 
plants, there was not sufficient acceptance of nuclear power in Switzerland for the 
construction of a new plant to be envisaged. Even if a majority of citizens wanted it, there 
would still be the problem of acceptance by future neighbours of the plant and the 
moratorium in force until the end of the century. 
33. The current recession had led to a stabilization of energy consumption in Europe, 
including Switzerland. But let there be no mistake: consumption would start rising again 
(albeit more slowly), and new plants would have to be built. However, they would be built 
only if people were convinced that they were needed, so credible energy saving measures 
would have to be taken. 
34. Advances would also have to be made in waste management. In some countries, 
facilities for the final storage of low- and medium-level radioactive waste were in operation. 
In Switzerland, after prolonged studies, the probable final storage site had been selected, but 
before construction work could start further studies would be necessary and political and 
legal opposition would have to be overcome. There was probably no other technology whose 
implementation was so difficult - at least in Switzerland. 
35. Given the large amounts involved, each country using nuclear technology should store 
its low- and medium-level radioactive waste within its own territory. In the case of highly 
radioactive waste, on the other hand, given the small amounts involved the producer 
countries should, for safety and cost reasons, collaborate in establishing a few final storage 
facilities rather than each establishing its own facility. He hoped that more would be heard 
on that subject in the coming decades. 
36. Mr. KOCH (Denmark) said that already in 1985, one year before the 
Chernobyl accident, Denmark had decided that nuclear energy should not be utilized in its 
electricity production - a decision based on the assessment that the nuclear safety and waste 
storage problems remained unsolved. His country had therefore also decided to reduce its 
CO2 emissions by means that were, in its opinion, more acceptable from an environmental 
and safety point of view. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 11 

37. In accordance with international recommendations, Denmark aimed to reduce 
CO2 emissions by 20% during the period until the year 2005. It was also aiming to reduce 
total energy consumption substantially. 
38. Denmark was, and had been for a number of years, one of the nations with the lowest 
consumption of energy per unit of GNP. Nevertheless, the Government and Parliament were 
of the opinion that even in Denmark there was considerable potential for increased energy 
conservation. 
39. The target was to reduce energy consumption by 15% in the coming 15 years, in 
accordance with the target - set in the Brundtland Commission's report on sustainable 
development - of a 50 % reduction in the energy consumption of the industrialized countries 
over a period of 50 years. Extremely important for attaining those ambitious targets would 
be greater efficiency in energy production and consumption and the use of other types of 
fuel. 
40. An important way of increasing efficiency in district heating was to increase combined 
heat and power production from the present level of 50 % to a level of 90 %. 
41. The means of increasing efficiency in energy consumption included a broad variety 
of regulatory and fiscal measures. The conversion to other types of fuel would consist 
mainly in replacing coal by natural gas and new and renewable sources of energy. 
42. A CO2 tax had already been introduced in Denmark, independently of the fact that 
the European Community had failed in its efforts to introduce a common Community CO2 tax 
in the current year. The other elements of the Danish strategy had been implemented or 
were in process of implementation and had started to take effect. 
43. Turning to Agency matters, he associated himself with the statement made by the 
representative of Belgium on behalf of the European Community and its member States. 
44. Since the 1992 session of the General Conference, significant developments had taken 
place in two important fields of direct or indirect concern to the Agency, and it had become 
clear that strengthening the international non-proliferation regime and improving nuclear 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 12 

safety were two of the most demanding challenges faced by to the international community 
in the nuclear field. 

45. Denmark regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of the international non-proliferation 
regime and was pleased that the number of States party to the NPT was still growing making 
non-proliferation a universally accepted principle. At the same time, however, it was 
deeply concerned about the current problems regarding the acceptance and application of 
Agency safeguards verification. He was referring to the serious problems connected with 
the DPRK, but his delegation was also concerned about the fact that nearly 50 of the nonnuclear-
weapon States party to the NPT had not yet concluded safeguards agreements in 
accordance with their treaty obligations. Although the outstanding agreements related to 
States with no significant nuclear activities, it remained a matter of importance for the 
credibility of the NPT and the safeguards system that States should comply with their 
obligations under Article HI. 
46. The non-detection of Iraq's secret nuclear weapons programme had demonstrated 
clearly the need to strengthen the Agency's capability to detect undeclared nuclear facilities 
and activities. Consequently, Denmark strongly supported every effort aimed at enhancing 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system. The signing in February of the 
agreement between the Agency and EURATOM for application of the Partnership Approach 
had been a positive step in that direction. Through the Partnership Approach substantial 
economic benefits could be realized, enabling the Agency to achieve more effective 
utilization of safeguards resources, and use of that approach might also be considered in 
other regions of the world. 
47. All possible ways of strengthening the safeguards system should be examined with a 
view to reducing the number of cases of illicit trade in nuclear materials and other radioactive 
substances. 
48. To ensure that co-operation in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy did not 
contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the comprehensive export and supply 
controls must be tightened. In that connection, Denmark welcomed the growing acceptance 
of the Nuclear Suppliers Group guidelines on trade in nuclear-related goods and technology 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 13 

and the fact that members of the Group had now modified the guidelines to provide that 
Agency safeguards were required on all current and future nuclear activities as a condition 
for significant new supplies. All other nuclear suppliers should adopt the policy of full-scope 
safeguards as a condition of supply. 

49. It was a problem of great concern to the entire international community that countries 
in Eastern and Central Europe and the former Soviet Union were operating nuclear power 
plants at critically low safety levels. Some of the plants in question ought to be shut down 
immediately, and his delegation regretted that the current financial and energy supply 
situation of the countries concerned ruled out immediate decommissioning. However, it 
appreciated the efforts being made by the Agency to help strengthen nuclear safety in those 
countries and welcomed the fact that during the past year the Agency had moved into a closer 
working relationship with the multilateral bodies which bore the major responsibility for 
nuclear safety assistance. In particular, it was of significance that the Agency now had a 
formal relationship with the G-24 as a technical adviser. 
50. The Danish Government supported efforts to exploit the large energy-saving potential 
in the countries in question and to develop longer-term alternative energy supply strategies 
aimed at reducing energy dependence and encouraging a swifter shutdown of the unsafe 
reactors. 
51. Denmark favoured the creation of a comprehensive and legally binding international 
nuclear safety regime. Important steps towards that goal had already been taken in the work 
on drafting a nuclear safety convention and in the negotiations on a nuclear protocol to the 
European Energy Charter. 
52. With regard to the drafting of a nuclear safety convention, Denmark was a little 
disappointed at the outcome of the work of the technical and legal experts. It would have 
preferred to see a convention covering all nuclear activities, but it now appeared that the 
convention would be limited essentially to civil nuclear power plants. However, his 
delegation hoped that, with the completion of the drafting of the convention, the political will 
to begin negotiations on an international instrument on the safety of waste management would 
be forthcoming. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 14 

53. As to the European Energy Charter, substantial progress had been made towards the 
conclusion of a protocol on principles governing the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
installations. The present draft protocol covered the entire fuel cycle and would supplement not 
duplicate - the work done in the nuclear convention field. Another important aspect of 
the protocol would be a legal obligation for parties planning the construction of nuclear 
installations to consult with neighbouring States and take into consideration their concerns. 
Denmark believed that adoption of the principle that neighbouring countries must be 
consulted would be a major step forward. 
54. The need to strengthen the nuclear liability regime was perceived with a growing 
sense of urgency. Denmark, which greatly appreciated the work being done by the Standing 
Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, hoped that the intensification of the 
Committee's efforts would lead to the submission of draft amendments to a revision 
conference on the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage - possibly 
in 1994. 
55. Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance activities, 
which were still growing at a substantial rate. It could accept the target of US $58.5 million 
for contributions to the TACF in 1994 and had already pledged its full share. 
56. Ms. OK (Turkey) said that the Agency's endeavours during the past year in 
the areas of nuclear safety and safeguards had been particularly noteworthy. 
57. Nuclear safety was a matter of international - rather than merely national - concern, 
and it was to be hoped that the momentum gained to date would be kept up in the work on 
drafting a nuclear safety convention. However, the Group of Experts would have to make 
further progress before a diplomatic conference could be convened to finalize the text. The 
States interested in achieving a widely accepted convention should display the political will 
necessary for overcoming their major differences and seek solutions which took account of 
the basic interests of all. She hoped that the scope of the convention would ultimately be 
expanded to cover all parts of the fuel cycle. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 15 

58. Primary responsibility for applying the resulting international nuclear safety regime 
would rest with national authorities, but the internationally agreed nuclear safety principles 
would provide a basis for national regulations. 
59. With regard to safeguards, her delegation shared the Director General's concern about 
the activities of undeclared facilities and supported the Agency's efforts to identify such 
facilities. 
60. Regarding the early notification of nuclear accidents, Turkey favoured the conclusion 
of bilateral agreements with its neighbours; such an agreement was in the process of being 
concluded with Bulgaria. Initiatives of that kind could contribute greatly to the enhancement 
of nuclear safety at the regional level. 
61. It was fortunate that there was now much wider awareness of the risks presented by 
reactors with inadequate safety standards. Her Government believed that every effort should 
be made, in particular, to raise the standards applied at the RBMK and old WWER plants 
in Central and Eastern Europe, and it looked forward to the early implementation of 
recommendations resulting from Agency missions to such facilities. Quite apart from pure 
considerations of safety, it should be borne in mind that, unless the standards were raised, 
nuclear power programmes of the countries in question would continually meet with the 
resistance of the anti-nuclear community. In that context, she urged the Director General to 
ensure maximum transparency in the Secretariat's dealings with Member States in the nuclear 
safety area and to report regularly to the relevant Agency bodies. 
62. In recent years, no significant progress had been made with regard to liability for 
nuclear damage, which was very regrettable given the importance of that issue in a world 
where nuclear power plants were in wide use. While it was difficult, of course, to reflect 
all views and interests in a single global mechanism, there ought to be some way of meeting 
the expectations of different States both within and outside the framework of the existing 
conventions. In view of the difficulties encountered by the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage in its efforts to achieve an improved liability regime using the civil law 
approach, a mechanism should be established under public international law for compensating 
States in the event of transboundary nuclear damage. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 16 

63. International security depended very much on the effective implementation of Agency 
safeguards. In that connection, her Government favoured the adoption of regional 
approaches in efforts to achieve non-proliferation objectives, notwithstanding the international 
character of the safeguards regime, and it accordingly welcomed the agreement recently 
reached between the PLO and Israel. The Declaration of Principles signed in Washington 
represented an historic step forward in the peace process. It was to be hoped that the recent 
encouraging developments in the Middle East would prove conducive to greater nuclear cooperation 
in the region, the consummation of the peace process engendering a firm political 
will to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
64. With regard to Iraq, the Agency inspection teams and the Director General himself 
were to be commended for their efforts to ensure the implementation of various United 
Nations Security Council resolutions. Her delegation hoped that, combined with increased 
co-operation on Iraq's part, those efforts would help bring peace and security to the region, 
thereby alleviating the sufferings of the Iraqi people and all others affected by the situation 
directly or indirectly. 
65. Her Government had repeatedly expressed its firm commitment to more effective 
safeguards, the urgent need for which had been clearly demonstrated by the unfortunate 
developments on the Korean Peninsula. Also, it believed that the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference would provide a good opportunity to examine the shortcomings of the existing 
safeguards and verification regimes. Steps should be taken, moreover, to demonstrate that 
violations of the NPT could not be tolerated and to put an end to a situation where certain 
countries, notwithstanding their adherence to NPT as non-nuclear-weapon States, had 
nevertheless been able in recent years to develop nuclear weapons production capacities. If 
the NPT was to be extended indefinitely, that situation could not be allowed to continue. 
66. It was imperative that every country adopt effective internal measures for controlling 
exports of nuclear technology and material and that the controls should be applied 
universally. Also, the transfer and sale of plutonium should be subject to international 
controls. Her Government was seriously worried about media reports relating to such 
matters and believed that some mechanism should be established whereby clarification could 
be sought from the States concerned. As a non-nuclear-weapon State that had faithfully met 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 17 

all its NPT obligations, Turkey had consistently opposed any action leading to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons, and it expected other States parties to adopt the same 
attitude. 

67. The Board's endorsement of a scheme for reporting exports and imports of nuclear 
materials and special equipment had been a step forward in the creation of an effective and 
reliable safeguards regime, as had been the provision by SAGSI of advice in that connection. 
Her Government would continue to support the Agency in that area. 
68. The non-proliferation regime had been considerably strengthened by the recent 
developments in Africa, and it was to be hoped that there would be similar developments. 
69. In recent years, during a period when the Agency's ability to implement its 
programmes had been seriously impaired by financial problems, important international 
political developments and economic and technological changes had taken place, necessitating 
a careful review of the Agency's role in the light of the new challenges and the expanding 
needs of Member States. In that context, Member States and the Secretariat should look into 
ways of increasing the scientific and technological capabilities of developing countries with 
regard to the peaceful applications of nuclear energy, the ultimate goal being sustainable 
development. 
70. Inviting the Agency to co-operate with her Government in investigating the possible 
existence of radionuclides in the Black Sea, she said that the Turkish authorities were willing 
to co-operate with all the countries concerned under the Agency's auspices and would 
welcome proposals in that regard. 
71. With regard to the resolution on education and training in radiological protection and 
nuclear safety adopted by the General Conference in 1992, she expressed her country's 
readiness to host some of the regional and interregional training courses referred to in 
document GC(XXXVII)/1067. 
72. Expressing appreciation of the comprehensive report on personnel questions 
(GC(XXXVII)/1071), she commended the Director General for the internal measures which 
had been taken in order to create a working environment free from gender bias and 
conducive to the employment of women in the Secretariat. She looked forward to the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 18 

recruitment during the coming year of a large number of qualified women from developing 
countries. 

73. Finally, she expressed her delegation's appreciation for the Secretariat's co-operation 
with Turkey under the technical assistance and co-operation programme for 1993; Turkey 
looked forward to maintaining its close co-operation with the Agency in the years to come. 
74. Mr. OJANEN (Finland) said that the Agency, faced with new challenges, was 
in the process of rejuvenating itself. Fresh approaches were being sought to old problems, 
and some new activities had come to the fore. At the same time, financial constraints and 
the constantly changing environment in which the Agency operated had added to the 
pressures for change. It had become necessary to make economies by cutting back or 
discontinuing some traditional activities which, while valuable in themselves, no longer 
warranted the priority once accorded to them. More and more activities of lesser priority 
would have to be phased out in order to make room for new priorities. 
75. The Agency's Secretariat had so far been reasonably successful in the difficult task 
of making proportionate savings across the entire overall programme. Increasingly, however, 
it found itself in a situation where it was difficult to start new activities within the constraints 
of zero-real-growth budgeting. Priorities would have to be established not only within, but 
also between, the various individual programmes. The Agency's essential activities, 
safeguards and nuclear safety, would have to be treated differently from the rest. That did 
not mean, however, that there would be no need for rethinking within those two programme 
areas: on the contrary, new concepts and ideas would be needed there more than ever 
before. Other activities could benefit from better co-ordination with other international 
organizations, such as FAO or WHO. 
76. In the past, doing a little of everything might have presented itself as a workable 
compromise. In the future, however, the Agency would have to concentrate on areas where 
it could make a difference, and put other activities on hold or discontinue them altogether. 
A culture of priority-setting would no doubt take some time to emerge, but there was no 
better approach to saving. He looked forward to programmes with priority indications based 
on project alternatives rather than on universally applied percentage savings. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 19 

77. The creation of a more reliable nuclear safety regime remained one of the most 
important tasks facing the international nuclear community. In his delegation's view, the 
adoption of an international nuclear safety convention could be a major step in the right 
direction. The Group of Experts for the drafting of such a convention had made good 
progress, but problems remained which needed to be ironed out without further delay. 
78. Finland would have preferred safety aspects of the whole nuclear fuel cycle, including 
waste management, to be covered by the envisaged convention. Waste emanating from the 
military utilization of nuclear energy was an increasingly topical problem, and he believed 
that the safety aspects of such waste should also be regulated internationally and hoped that 
the convention would be expanded in that respect in the future. Nevertheless, Finland was 
prepared to help in finalizing the convention by the spring of 1994, in the expectation that 
the standards to be established would serve to improve the legal status and the practical 
application of the safety regime worldwide. 
79. He was pleased to note the rapid progress achieved during the past year with regard 
to nuclear safety assistance to countries of Central and Eastern Europe. The co-ordination 
structures for the provision of assistance had now largely been put in place. 
80. The Agency had carried out thorough safety surveys on different reactor types, 
enlisting the best expertise available in Member States, and provided a forum for cooperation. 
In many cases, the Agency's studies and safety assessments constituted an 
indispensable preliminary phase for bilateral and multilateral projects. 
81. Finland was contributing to those efforts through its bilateral programme of cooperation 
with the Russian Federation, giving priority to improving the safety of nuclear 
power plants adjacent to Finland. It was also participating in multilateral co-operation 
efforts, such as the projects initiated by the G-24 and the European Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development (EBRD). 
82. In his delegation's view, priority should be given to programmes in those countries 
where the supply of electricity was most dependent on nuclear power generation, where the 
general safety regime was inadequate and where there was a readiness to make a binding 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 20 

commitment to joint efforts to close sub-standard reactors as soon as the energy situation 
allowed. 

83. The role of safeguards as the Agency's main function was now more topical than 
ever. The innovative work done by SAGSI was an important contribution to safeguards 
development, and deserved to be followed up by SAGSI itself and by the Secretariat. The 
policy-making organs of the Agency should keep the matter under active consideration. 
Further work would no doubt be needed, and Finland was ready to participate in field trials 
of new safeguards methods and equipment. 
84. Finland would participate fully in the voluntary reporting scheme for imports and 
exports of nuclear materials, and Finland's support programme on new methods of 
safeguards implementation would be continued. 
85. The value of openness and transparency had been clearly demonstrated in various 
fields of intergovernmental activity, particularly where verification was an important aspect 
of the implementation of agreed arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation measures. 
Improved transparency, together with better understanding of the facilities to be inspected, 
might well lead to savings. In future, safeguards could be focused increasingly on facilities 
calling for particular attention, such as complex bulk-handling facilities and research reactors. 
Light-water reactors might be an example of facilities where safeguards implementation could 
be further streamlined. 
86. That might involve difficult political decisions, and time would be needed in order 
to build up the necessary confidence, but he believed that, if the Agency was to increase its 
relevance in the non-proliferation field, it had to take that direction. 
87. Despite some setbacks, the current decade held the promise of major advances in the 
fields of disarmament and arms control. The next milestone was likely to be the 1995 NPT 
Review and Extension Conference, and in that connection he emphasized Finland's support 
for the unconditional and indefinite extension of the NPT. 
88. All countries which had not yet acceded to NPT should do so, thereby making 
universal the single most important arms control agreement. Together with the other Nordic 
countries, Finland had made representations to those countries and to the NPT parties which 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 21 

had not yet concluded with the Agency the safeguards agreement required by the NPT. It 
was convinced that those two non-proliferation measures, accession to the NPT and 
conclusion of the required safeguards agreement, were also the best possible way to promote 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

89. Those newly independent States which still had nuclear weapons on their soil should 
accede to the NPT as soon as possible. The international community stood ready to assist 
them in their denuclearization efforts. Finland was ready to contribute to support 
programmes designed to help develop a safeguards implementation capacity in Ukraine and 
other countries concerned. 
90. Following recent new developments in the area of disarmament, the Agency might 
be given a role in the international verification of a comprehensive test ban and be entrusted 
with the task of safeguarding nuclear material deriving from the dismantlement of nuclear 
weapons. Another welcome development had been the initiatives taken with a view to the 
prohibition of the production of fissionable material for weapons purposes. 
91. His Government was particularly pleased that South Africa had dismantled its nuclear 
weapons programme and subjected its nuclear materials to verification by the Agency. That 
unprecedented action was proof of the benefits accruing from accession to the nonproliferation 
regime. 
92. Progress had also been made in dismantling Iraq's nuclear military capacity, although 
work remained to be done in implementing the relevant United Nations Security Council 
resolutions. 
93. On the other hand, the DPRK had yet to respond to the request of the Board of 
Governors for further information and access to certain locations, and he regretted that the 
Board had not been able to report any progress on that issue: on the contrary, even routine 
inspections and other safeguards activities had been jeopardized. 
94. He reiterated Finland's full support for the actions of the Director General and the 
Secretariat. In his view, all aspersions cast on the impartiality of the Secretariat in 
performing tasks mandated by the NPT were unwarranted. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 22 

95. The case of the DPRK was a serious challenge to the NPT and to the integrity of the 
international non-proliferation regime; if left unresolved, it could pose a threat to 
international stability and security. The DPRK should remedy the situation by complying 
with its obligations without delay. 
96. A week before, his country's Parliament had voted (by 107 votes to 90) against the 
decision taken the previous February by the Finnish Government, pending parliamentary 
approval, to license the construction of a new nuclear power unit in Finland. That would 
lead to a reformulation of the Government's energy strategy, since the current one included 
the option of new nuclear capacity. 
97. That turn of events would not, however, lead to any change in the Government's 
policy concerning the Agency. His country remained a strong supporter of those activities 
of the Agency which it had supported all along - namely, activities which contributed to the 
safe and secure utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
Mr. Zaitsev (Russian Federation) took the Chair. 

98. Mr. EL-HUSSEIN (Sudan) said that recent major world developments would 
have important consequences for the Agency, which should adapt to them while continuing 
to pursue its objectives. For that to happen, Member States would have to foster a conducive 
climate, and in that connection he welcomed the fact that the large number of States party 
to the NPT was still increasing and appealed to all those States which had not yet acceded 
to the NPT to take that important step in the interests of world peace. 
99. It was necessary to accelerate progress towards the establishment of international 
mechanisms in the fields of nuclear safety, radiological protection and environmental 
protection in order to enhance confidence in nuclear power plant safety and dispel fears 
connected with the dumping of nuclear waste, especially in developing countries. All 
Member States should collaborate towards that end. 
100. He welcomed the courageous step taken by South Africa in acceding to the NPT and 
concluding the required safeguards agreement with the Agency and also the recent declaration 
that South Africa had terminated its nuclear weapons programme. He greatly regretted, 
however, that Israel had not yet acceded to the NPT. Israel's attitude was hampering efforts 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 23 

to achieve a just peace in the Middle East and rendering meaningless the resolution 
concerning safeguards in that region which the General Conference had adopted in 1992. 

101. The Agency's technical co-operation activities were important for developing 
countries, particularly the least developed among them. However, the serious financial 
situation of the Agency was having an adverse impact on many technical co-operation 
projects. There was accordingly an urgent need to find ways of increasing the resources 
available for technical co-operation - perhaps through allocations from the Regular Budget, 
whereby there would be less need to rely on voluntary contributions to the TACF. 
102. The Agency's African Member States were pinning their hopes on AFRA as a 
mechanism for achieving some of their goals in such fields as medicine, agriculture, radiation 
protection, food irradiation, environmental protection, and training and manpower 
development. However, inadequate funding remained an obstacle to the implementation of 
many projects which had been pronounced feasible. He hoped that those projects would 
ultimately attract the necessary financial support from all Member States and/or international 
donor organizations. 
103. Sudan, which strongly supported the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, was 
convinced that nuclear energy had an important role to play in helping to create the 
infrastructures necessary for development. The competent authorities in Sudan, in cooperation 
with the Agency, were striving to enhance the country's capabilities in that field 
with a view to Sudan's engaging in a wide range of peaceful nuclear applications. 
104. Mr. FRANK (Israel) said that the last decade of the twentieth century had 
introduced momentous and unexpected changes in a world to which people had become 
accustomed over nearly half a century. Wherever one looked, there was flux and motion, 
hopefully in a positive direction. The ultimate outcome of the worldwide turmoil was hard if 
not impossible - to predict, but the flow of events presented new, exciting challenges and 
a fresh burden of responsibility. 
105. Everyone was aware of the momentous developments which might usher in a more 
benign era in the Middle East: the unprecedented breakthrough that had taken place during 
recent weeks in the negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians and between Israel and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 24 

Jordan. The same, he hoped, would happen soon with the other participants in the peace 
process. The people of Israel hoped and prayed that those positive developments would mark 
the opening of a new era in the Middle East, and in the relationship between Israel and its 
neighbours - an era of peace, true reconciliation, security, co-operation and economic 
growth. They knew that the international community to a large extent supported that 
process. 

106. It was important, however, not to lose sight of the difficulties with which the 
transition was fraught and of the fact that goodwill, patience and restraint were required of 
all parties involved in order to create the confidence without which progress could not be 
achieved. All the same, there was dramatic movement on some crucial political issues, and 
intensive multilateral talks were in progress on various matters of regional concern. 
107. Nevertheless, the fact still had to be faced that there were powerful States in the 
region which continued to deny Israel its existence, refused to forswear war as a means of 
settling outstanding issues with it and refused to be parties to the peace talks. That fact had 
a special bearing on the problems of regional security and arms control, which could not be 
adequately addressed until all parties explicitly accepted Israel's place in the Middle East and 
renounced war as a means of settling conflicts. Until such time, the best that Israel could 
do was to work out confidence-building measures with its partners in the peace process. 
Such measures could be eminently useful in promoting bilateral reassurance, but regional 
security and arms control depended above all on the express willingness of all States of the 
region to co-exist peacefully. That stage had not been reached yet. 
108. As the Agency pondered its own contribution to the peace process, it should above 
all acknowledge the primacy of the peace talks - the free and direct negotiations between the 
parties on all outstanding issues, and not on any single issue alone. The Agency should, he 
believed, put its expertise at the disposal of the parties to the peace talks once they began to 
engage in negotiations on a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. It would not be 
helpful if the Agency were to pre-empt the agenda of the peace talks and take initiatives 
unrelated to the preconditions for regional security about which he had just been speaking. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 357 
page 25 

109. The Agency had a tremendously important technical mission and deserved to be 
commended on its highly professional and dedicated work in striving to meet new challenges. 
The Director General had once said that the Agency was the "tailor" who knew how to make 
a suit to fit the requirements of the customer. That was a modest but apt description of the 
Agency's role, and in the present instance it was the parties to the peace talks who were the 
customers. They would undoubtedly call on the experience of the Agency when the time was 
ripe. 
110. The new spirit of the peace process warranted the long overdue reinstatement of all 
the rights and privileges of Israel as a full Member State by the governing bodies of the 
Agency. 
111. The Agency was to be commended on the systematic, coherent and comprehensive 
way in which it dealt with nuclear safety and radiation protection issues. Its intensive 
programme aimed at improving the safety standards for nuclear power plant and research 
reactor operation, radiological protection and waste disposal was making impressive progress. 
However, like some other intensive and comprehensive programmes, that commendable 
enterprise should be protected from a tendency to grasp too much or to try achieving very 
far-reaching goals too soon. He would illustrate that point by means of two examples. 
112. One was the revision of the Basic Safety Standards for Radiological Protection, an 
important safety-related effort where an attempt had been made to introduce new approaches 
and a much broader coverage. That had caused a number of States concern because of the 
implications it might have for practices which they had been implementing formally for a 
long time. Israel, which had submitted detailed comments on the first draft revised texts, 
believed that the Agency and its partner organizations should limit somewhat the scope of 
the Basic Safety Standards so as to gain the widest possible international acceptance while 
still following the main recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological 
Protection (ICRP). 
113. The other example was the continuing effort to draft a nuclear safety convention. 
Israel's policy had been to support the establishment of such a convention provided that it 
was limited at the present stage to nuclear power plants (on the safety principles for which 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 26 

there was wide consensus) and that it was an incentive-type convention; both stipulations 
seemed to be essential if the convention was to gain wide participation with negligible 
reservations. Israel, which had expressed its views on the convention at the General 
Conference's 1992 session and at the meetings of the Group of Experts, hoped that with 
some narrowing of the draft convention's scope more progress would be made in the near 
future on what was a very important subject. 

114. Most of the Agency's safety-related activities, being conducted at the level of the 
professional expert, went virtually unnoticed by - and were hardly comprehensible to members 
of the public. Yet the public acceptance of nuclear applications which were not just 
safe, but obviously safe, was essential. In many respects, the public acceptance issue was 
the most complex problem facing the world nuclear community in general and the Agency 
in particular. Risk perceptions based on partial knowledge and misconception were hard to 
counter, and long-standing credibility gaps were difficult to bridge. He believed, however, 
that the task was not impossible. Much could be accomplished by a sustained, well 
co-ordinated and purposeful educational campaign in which the Agency played an important 
role. Without such an effort, the Agency's other - technical - efforts might prove to be 
insufficient. 
115. A major topic of such a campaign should be food irradiation, an urgently required 
technique which was wholeheartedly recommended by all relevant international organizations 
but whose application was encountering unjustified obstacles. There was a pressing need to 
understand what was preventing the public acceptance of food irradiation and to provide the 
public with information which brought out the enormous advantages of the technique. 
116. Noting that he came from a region where water supply problems were of acute 
concern to the responsible authorities and the public at large, he said that the use of nuclear 
reactors as a source of power for water desalination plants had long been an unfulfilled 
promise. Only one nuclear desalination project had ever been implemented. The Agency's 
activities in that field, restarted about four years earlier with the active participation of an 
expert from Israel, had produced good technical documents and recommendations, but 
practical implementation was still a long way off and much remained to be done. The 
Agency should devote more effort and resources to the outstanding activities, such as the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 27 

preparation of a detailed guidebook describing the steps that should be taken by any country 
or organization contemplating nuclear desalination. Public acceptance was crucial in that 
area also for, besides the usual issue of nuclear power safety, the public had to be absolutely 
convinced that the water produced by nuclear desalination plants was completely safe and 
wholesome. Nuclear power offered the hope of cheaper, safer, cleaner and more reliable 
energy for both desalination and general purposes. The Agency was playing an important 
role in that connection, but additional efforts were needed. 

117. Israel's participation in the Agency's technical activities had increased in recent years. 
Israel had hosted several Agency meetings sponsored by various governmental and nongovernmental 
institutions, the most recent being an international workshop on integrated risk 
management, held in Tel-Aviv in November 1991, and an advisory group meeting on 
radiation technology, held in Jerusalem in February 1992. A workshop on expert system 
prototypes used in nuclear technology was due to take place in October in Herzelia, near 
Tel-Aviv. 
118. Nuclear techniques were nowadays widely used in research establishments and in 
industry, agriculture and medicine, and the use of isotopes, sealed sources, commercial 
accelerators and nuclear medicine instrumentation was growing every year. It was essential 
to ensure that the workers using them and the public at large were protected by stringent 
safety measures. However, safety measures alone were not enough; rigorous and efficient 
training of radiation protection personnel was needed in order to establish a sound 
professional infrastructure of people dedicated to the safety of all users. Safety principles 
were the same everywhere and were not subject to national boundaries. Safety training was 
therefore an appropriate subject for international co-operation. Israel, which was willing to 
share its knowledge and experience in the field of radiation protection, would be hosting a 
two-week training course on basic radiological protection to be held in 1994 under the 
auspices of the Agency - and it would be doing so in the spirit of peace and co-operation that 
was dearly needed in the region. 
119. MR. YTURRIAGA (Spain), having expressed his delegation' s full support for 
the statement made on behalf of the member States of the European Community by the 
Ambassador of Belgium, said that in 1992 Spain's nuclear power plants, with a load factor 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 28 

of 85.8%, had produced 53.837 GW.h of electricity, accounting for 38.7% of the country's 
total electricity production. The figures reflected the fact that Spain's nuclear power plants 
were performing well. 

120. A priority of Spain's National Energy Plan was maximum safety and reliability in the 
operation of the country's nuclear power plants. Accordingly, a considerable investment was 
being made in plant maintenance and there was a permanent process of adaptation to 
increasing safety demands. 
121. Turning to radioactive waste management, he said that the El Cabril storage facility 
for low- and intermediate-level waste was now in operation and would be able to 
accommodate all such waste produced in Spain over the next 20 years. As to high-level 
waste, an extensive geological survey was under way with a view to the selection, by the end 
of the century, of suitable sites for storage facilities. 
122. At the international level, there was growing co-operation among Agency Member 
States in harmonizing nuclear safety standards and criteria, and the Agency's involvement 
in that exercise was proving essential. 
123. His authorities, which considered nuclear safety to be something that was universal 
in character, were looking forward to the adoption of the envisaged nuclear safety 
convention - an instrument which should spell out the fundamentals of nuclear safety and 
provide for the mechanisms necessary for verifying compliance with them. They believed 
that the convention should cover not only nuclear power plants, but also fuel cycle facilities, 
but for the sake of expediting adoption they were prepared to accept a convention covering 
only nuclear power plants - on the understanding that fuel cycle facilities would be covered 
by a subsequent convention. 
124. His authorities also hoped that agreement would soon be reached on a revised version 
of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, and to that end they were 
contributing to the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage. They 
would prefer it if the scope of the new convention included the question of supplementary 
compensation, but in the interests of speeding up the revision process they could go along 
with the idea of two separate conventions. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 29 

125. Spain, which attached great importance to the services provided by the Agency 
through OSART, ASSET and RAP AT missions, had made experts available to serve as team 
members and had received missions at its own plants and facilities. 
126. His delegation welcomed the Agency's initiative in establishing the IRRT 
(International Regulatory Review Team) service with a view to strengthening and enhancing 
the effectiveness of Member States' nuclear regulatory bodies. The initiation of the ASCOT 
(Assessment of Safety Culture in Organizations Team) service was also a highly interesting 
development. 
127. Spain supported the work on developing a common basis for safety assessments at 
nuclear power plants built to earlier standards and the initiative to establish a material 
properties database with a view to gaining a better understanding of the ageing of principal 
nuclear power plants systems and components. Spanish organizations, companies and experts 
were participating in the Agency's extrabudgetary programmes related to the safety of 
nuclear power plants in Central and Eastern Europe, and his Government's financial 
contribution to those programmes was considerable. Finally, his country supported the 
Agency's work on decommissioning under the RADWASS programme. 
128. His delegation was pleased that INES was being applied for a trial period to facilities 
other than nuclear power plants. It regarded the scale as a useful means for establishing a 
climate of understanding between the media and those responsible for nuclear safety. 
129. Also, his delegation supported the work on revising the Agency's Basic Safety 
Standards (BSS) in the light of the ICRP's 1990 recommendations; the revised BSS should 
provide valuable guidance to Member States wishing to establish radiological protection 
regimes and thereby reduce radiation exposures. In that connection, his delegation 
considered that it was time to update the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of 
Radioactive Material in the light of the ICRP's latest recommendations thereby bringing them 
into line with the BSS as revised. 
130. Believing that nuclear energy should be used solely for peaceful purposes, Spain had 
acceded to the NPT and looked forward to the time when all countries would be party to it. 
Accordingly, his country urged all States which had not yet done so to accede to the NPT. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 30 

Also, it endorsed the initiatives aimed at the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in 
the Middle East and Africa and supported the Agency's efforts to achieve the application in 
the near future of full-scope safeguards to all nuclear activities in those regions. 

131. The South African Government was to be commended for the positive stance it had 
taken recently in collaborating closely with the Agency in the implementation of its NPT 
safeguards agreement and in renouncing its nuclear weapons programme. He trusted that its 
example would be followed by other States. 
132. His delegation believed that the NPT should be applied in its entirety and that States 
parties could not elect to fulfil only certain obligations while avoiding others, as the DPRK 
was unfortunately trying to do. The Agency, for its part, should ensure full application of 
the safeguards provided for in the NPT and in the agreements concluded pursuant to it, and 
Spain strongly supported the Agency's efforts and had full confidence in what the Director 
General was doing to that end. 
133. Welcoming the fact that in 1992 the Secretariat had detected no diversion of 
safeguarded materials, he said that recent experience had shown how useful it could be if 
Member States were informed about the non-detection, in countries which had concluded 
INFCIRC/153-type agreements, of undeclared nuclear facilities and materials. 
134. For that to be achieved, the present safeguards system would have to be changed in 
a number of ways and the Agency's ability to obtain and analyse information on nuclear 
activities in the different countries and on international movements of nuclear equipment and 
materials would have to be strengthened. That was the purpose of certain proposals which 
had been made by the Director General and which Spain - and the other countries belonging 
to the European Community - supported. In that connection, his delegation considered that 
the decisions taken by the Board of Governors on special inspections, the reporting of 
imports and exports of nuclear material and the early provision of design information 
represented important steps in the process of strengthening the effectiveness and improving 
the efficiency of the safeguards system without an appreciable increase in costs. Since the 
beginning of 1993, Spain had been providing the information required under the system of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 31 

universal notification. If the system was to work properly, however, there had to be 
reciprocity, and he called upon all States which had not yet done so to join the system. 

135. His delegation was awaiting new proposals from the Director General, made in the 
light of recent SAGSI recommendations, and trusted that in them due importance would be 
given to the streamlining of safeguards, the costs of introducing new measures being balanced 
by savings achieved through the discontinuation of non-essential activities; for example, 
considerable savings should be possible as a result of the agreement concluded by the Agency 
and the European Community on a new Partnership Approach. His country, which attached 
great importance to the current activities aimed at strengthening and streamlining the 
safeguards system, would continue collaborating with the Agency to that end. 
136. Turning briefly to technical assistance and co-operation, which Spain regarded as one 
of the Agency's fundamental activities, he reiterated his country's position of principle 
regarding contributions to the TACF: Article XIV of the Agency's Statute provided for 
assessed contributions to the Regular Budget (determined in the light of principles adopted 
by the United Nations) and voluntary contributions to the TACF (dependent on the 
willingness of Member States to pay), and it was contrary to the spirit and the letter of the 
Statute to try to convert, as if by magic, the latter type of contribution into the former type. 
137. In 1992, although it had been going through a period of great economic difficulty, the 
peseta losing 21% of its value, Spain had during the previous year made contributions 
totalling US $752 000 in value in support of Agency technical assistance activities - an 
increase of $165 000 over the value of its 1991 contributions. A policy of financial austerity 
had now been introduced, however, and that was affecting - inter alia - Spain's voluntary 
contributions to international organizations. His country was therefore not able to increase 
its contributions in support of technical assistance activities during the current year, although 
the 1992 level would be maintained. 
138. Mr. SQUICCIARINI (Holy See), commending the Agency's efforts to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world, said it now seemed to be widely accepted that, particularly in the 
developing world, economic growth and industrial development could not be achieved 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 32 

without some resort to nuclear energy. However, besides having a great diversity of 
beneficial applications nuclear energy was open to abuse for destructive purposes, and there 
was also the risk of harm as a result of incidents at reactors and other nuclear facilities. The 
Agency had therefore been created in order to demonstrate that nuclear energy need not be 
a source of destruction and that it could be harnessed for peaceful purposes - to the benefit 
of everyone. 

139. There was now a pressing need for greater worldwide collaboration within the Agency 
framework in order to minimize the hazards involved in using nuclear technology and to 
ensure that the technology was used for peaceful purposes only. The importance of "building 
up a common consensus through common effort and commitment" had been emphasized by 
His Holiness Pope John Paul II on the occasion of his visit to the Vienna International Centre 
(VIC) ten years previously. 
140. In the modern world, where all countries were seeking to improve the economic and 
social life of their people, every effort should be made to extend the benefits of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy, the industrialized countries sharing their expertise with the 
developing ones. Also, now that the East-West confrontation was over, the industrialized 
countries should do their utmost to improve the nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and 
thereby help ensure reliable energy supplies there. In addition, the Agency - together with 
other international organizations - should continue with the efforts under way to mitigate the 
still widespread consequences of the Chernobyl accident. 
141. States should rise above merely national interests and ensure that the established 
channels of dialogue, including dialogue on nuclear issues, did not become blocked. 
Mankind's resources should be used carefully, to the maximum benefit of mankind; they 
should never be used against life, but rather for enhancing it and making it truly human. In 
the use of science and technology, which could contribute greatly to the advancement of life, 
man was the ultimate arbiter. It was therefore important that scientific and technical 
knowledge went hand in hand with respect for the individual human being and for the 
common good. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 33 

142. Recalling that, when visiting the VIC, His Holiness Pope John Paul II had encouraged 
those working there "to be servants of the world, which needs to be ever more united, to be 
servants of the truth about man, to be servants of the common good of all nations and 
peoples", he wished the Agency ever greater success in its efforts to serve humanity. The 
field in which the Agency operated was one where abuse could lead to death and destruction, 
but also where an important source of energy for the economic and technical progress of 
future generations was to be found. 
143. Mr. GUTIERREZ LEYTON (Chile) said that in his country increased efforts 
had been made over the past year - by a growing number of private and State bodies - to 
incorporate nuclear applications in the exploitation of natural resources, environmental 
protection and production processes, the focus being on projects which yielded measurable 
social and economic benefits within a short space of time. 
144. Turning to technical co-operation matters, he said his delegation was most grateful 
for the continuing support of the Agency - particularly the Department of Technical Co-
operation and the Department of Research and Isotopes. Also, he informed the Conference 
that his country had recently concluded with Uruguay a new agreement for technical cooperation 
in the nuclear field and that a plan of action for 1994-95 would be established 
before the end of the year. He informed the Conference in addition that Chile would shortly 
be paying its full share of the 1994 target for voluntary contributions to the TACF and called 
on all other Member States - budgetary restrictions notwithstanding - to do likewise. 
145. Chile, which welcomed the current nuclear test moratorium, was concerned about 
China's apparent reluctance to express support for it and hoped that China would come out 
with an expression of support soon. 
146. His country, which was committed to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, would 
like to see the Tlatelolco Treaty modernized and fully in force. Ratification procedures were 
under way in Chile, for which the treaty should enter into force soon. 
147. Chile remained concerned about the possibility of accidents during the transportation 
of nuclear materials and radioactive waste and about the lack of international arrangements 
for the timely and universal reporting of such accidents. It believed that a study should be 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 34 

undertaken - with due account for existing international standards - into ways in which 
countries could protect people and the environment within and beyond their air space and 
territorial waters. Agreement on a commitment to inform the Agency's Secretariat of the 
route to be followed by every ship carrying radioactive materials, so that the Secretariat 
could notify Member States, would be a significant step forward in this important and 
delicate area. 

148. Radioactive waste could be transported by land, sea or air. Transport by land was 
the easiest to monitor since all land was under the jurisdiction of some State or other. 
Monitoring sea transport was more difficult since territorial waters accounted for only a small 
fraction of the world's seas and oceans, but Chile had formulated some principles for the 
monitoring of marine transport outside territorial waters with due respect for the right of free 
passage. As to transport by air, there were infinite expanses of air space outside the national 
jurisdiction of States to which no serious thought had so far been given, but it was easy to 
imagine the damage that could be wreaked by an aircraft with radioactive materials on board 
crashing onto a densely populated area. That issue was an important one, and Member States 
should begin to give it serious consideration. 
149. Regarding the current work on drafting a nuclear safety convention, Chile attached 
great importance to it both in view of the boost which such a convention could give to 
nuclear power generation worldwide and in connection with the nuclear fuel cycle and 
nuclear waste management. 
150. The criteria for the use of INES in reporting nuclear events at research reactors and 
other facilities should be implemented as soon as possible in the interest of improving the 
public image of nuclear energy applications. At the same time, steps should be taken to 
prevent misuse of the information provided. 
151. Nuclear techniques could be used to combat deterioration of the environment - as had 
been shown by the major achievements in the use of electron beam technology to treat flue 
gases in Poland, where the cost-benefit ratio appeared more favourable than that of 
conventional methods. There was particular interest in Chile in using the technology to treat 
the gases from copper smelting works, which had a high sulphur dioxide content. His 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 35 

country hoped to receive Agency support for the project in question, which was at an early 
stage. It was also looking into the uses of radiation in the treatment of liquid effluent. 

152. Chile, which was pleased to be co-operating with the Agency in its important initiative 
relating to the practical application of food irradiation in developing countries, had been 
selected by the Agency for a techno-economic feasibility study as described in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1068. His country had 15 years of experience in irradiating foodstuffs not 
only for internal consumption but also for export, and it was therefore concerned about the 
restrictions which had been imposed by the authorities in some countries on the import of 
irradiated foodstuffs despite the fact that food irradiation was an accepted practice in their 
own country. Such restrictions were hampering the Agency's promotional efforts. 
153. With regard to education and training in radiological protection and nuclear safety, 
his delegation believed that the use of a standard syllabus for post-graduate courses in 
radiological protection would help in ensuring an equally high level of theoretical and 
practical instruction in all regions. Also, account would be taken of the standard syllabus 
in the adaptation of various training courses to legislation recently passed in Chile. 
154. During the past year a group of Chilean scientists had been studying the properties 
and behaviour of ceramic compounds of lithium subjected to neutron irradiation, while 
another group had been carrying out modifications to Chile's research reactor in order that 
it might be used in neutron diffraction studies and the development of analytical techniques 
involving the neutron irradiation of the surfaces of various materials. 
155. Chile had recently joined the International Fusion Research Council. It hoped that 
through its membership of the Council its fusion activities would receive greater outside 
support and that would in turn it would be able to make a greater contribution to the efforts 
of the international scientific community in the fusion field. 
156. Since Chile was a major fruit grower and exporter, agricultural pest control was an 
important issue there. It was hoped that, with the help of a facility for producing sterile 
insects recently opened in the northern city of Arica, the Mediterranean fruit fly could be 
controlled or even eradicated throughout the country. It was estimated that the output of the 
facility would be sufficient not only to cover the domestic demand, but also to permit the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 36 

export of sterile insects. He thanked the Agency for supporting Chile's efforts through the 
provision of expert services, specialized equipment, and training. 

157. With regard to human health, new labelled molecules had been synthesized for use 
in cancer diagnosis and treatment in Chile, which was continuing to meet approximately 90 % 
of its radioisotope needs through domestic production. In addition, samarium and rhenium 
isotopes were being produced in projects supported by the Agency. In nuclear medicine, 
there had been interesting advances in investigations of chromosome damage due to radiation 
and in work on localizing radiopharmaceuticals in the organs and tissues of experimental 
animals; the use of computerized image processing in those studies had proved very helpful. 
158. The country's regulations for radiation protection and for licensing the use of ionizing 
radiation had been updated with the help of the Ministry of Health. In the field of radiation 
protection, intensive efforts were being made to achieve 100% coverage by mid-1994 of 
Chilean facilities using ionizing radiation. 
159. Chile's emergency preparedness had been put to the test when a radiation accident had 
occurred in Costa Rica and Chile had provided assistance under the Convention on Assistance 
in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. The country's programme 
of public information and education relating to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy had 
been concentrating its efforts on the production and services sectors, and the response from 
business had been encouraging. 
160. The National Atomic Energy Commissions of Chile and Argentina were working on 
plans for joint projects which might be carried out in the coming biennium. 
161. A number of seminars had been held in Chile over the past year with the participation 
of Agency experts. The topics covered had included nuclear law and safeguards, the 
preparation of technical assistance projects, and public education and information in the 
nuclear energy field. ARCAL activities had included a programme on the application of 
nuclear techniques in industry and one on the labelling of biomolecules and blood cells. 
Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) resumed the Chair. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 37 

162. Mr. TARMIDZI (Indonesia) said that his Government attached great 
importance to the promotional activities of the Agency and looked forward to an extension 
of those activities for the benefit of developing countries as a whole. The Agency's annual 
report referred to a number of training courses, seminars and conferences which had been 
held in Indonesia, and he hoped that such activities would be intensified in the future. 
163. Indonesia, whose foreign policy was geared to the achievement of a peaceful world 
based on justice and prosperity, had always emphasized the importance of comprehensive 
regional security. Over the years, the members of ASEAN had been in the forefront of 
efforts to achieve such security within a Zone of Peace, Freedom and Neutrality (ZOPFAN), 
of which a nuclear-weapon-free area was a principal component. 
164. A meeting of States parties to the Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the 
Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water, usually referred to as the Partial Test Ban 
Treaty (PTBT), had been held in New York on 10-11 August 1993 to examine the feasibility 
of reconvening the PTBT amendment conference later in the year. His country believed that 
achievement of the PTBT's ultimate objective, which was the discontinuation of test 
explosions of nuclear weapons in all spheres for all time, would be beneficial to people 
throughout the world, and his country's efforts in that direction were closely related to its 
efforts regarding the NPT Review and Extension Conference to be held in 1995. That year 
was likely to be a crucial one, since the Conference was to decide whether the NPT should 
remain in force, and if so, whether it should be extended indefinitely or only for additional 
periods or an additional period of time. 
165. Although the Agency's efforts to strengthen the safeguards system were widely 
appreciated, the political and geographical changes with disarmament and non-proliferation 
implications which had taken place during the past three years had meant that the Department 
of Safeguards was inevitably confronted with new problems. His delegation believed that 
the present situation, in which some countries claiming to be non-nuclear-weapon States had 
nuclear weapons within their territories, was not conducive to world peace and stability and 
posed a major challenge to the present safeguards regime. The geographical changes which 
might take place in the near future would bring further security problems. For that reason, 
Indonesia believed that the present uncertain situation definitely warranted an extension of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 38 

the NPT, although periodical reviews of its implementation should be undertaken in the light 
of current developments. 

166. Indonesia had always regarded safeguards as an important means of ensuring nuclear 
non-proliferation, particularly in regions of conflict or instability. The NPT had been 
designed to meet concerns about instability and to allay feelings of insecurity, and many 
countries had acceded to it for those reasons. In that context, he was pleased that the DPRK 
had decided to reconsider its decision to withdraw from the NPT and that it was willing to 
resume consultations with the Agency on inspection and related matters. He hoped that these 
consultations would be resumed in the near future and that they would produce solutions 
acceptable to all. 
167. The tasks currently being entrusted to the Agency safeguards system were more 
sensitive than the tasks assumed by the Agency in other fields. In endeavouring to enhance 
the effectiveness and efficiency of the system, the Secretariat should aim to make it 
scientifically and technically sound, and hence politically more acceptable. Indonesia would 
support the Secretariat's efforts to that end. 
168. Indonesia had recently been taking part in the Agency safeguards support programme, 
and his Government had been represented at the sixth meeting of Member State Support 
Programme Co-ordinators, at which the Indonesian participants had stated that Agency 
experts could use facilities in Indonesia for activities such as the testing of certain innovative 
ideas put forward by SAGSI earlier in the year. 
169. His country greatly appreciated the assistance which it had received from the Agency. 
During the first 25 years of Indonesia's long-term development plan, which had started 
in 1968, the Agency had supported the national nuclear programme through assistance in 
such areas as the utilization of isotopes and radiation in agriculture, human health and 
industry. 
170. By the end of Indonesia's fifth five-year development plan, in March 1994, the 
National Atomic Energy Agency would have succeeded in transferring the results of its 
research and development efforts to a significant number of users. For example, the 
National Institute of Agriculture had been provided with a number of mutants of improved 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 39 

quality - such as four varieties of upland rice and one variety of lowland rice, two varieties 
of soybean and one variety of mung bean - developed in the National Agency's facilities. 
In addition, a cobalt-60 irradiator specifically geared to sterilization and polymerization 
applications had been inaugurated in December 1992. 

171. In the area of human health, his delegation was grateful to the Agency for having 
contributed so significantly to the success of the 5th Asia and Oceania Congress on Nuclear 
Medicine and Biology, which had taken place in October 1992 in Jakarta and subsequently 
in Bali, and had been attended by about 600 doctors, pharmacists, biologists and other 
experts. 
172. Indonesia had also benefited from highly effective Agency technical assistance 
provided through projects designed to help with preparations for the introduction of nuclear 
power and related nuclear technology applications. The need for the exchange of up-to-date 
scientific information -a need felt particularly by developing countries - should be 
emphasized in that context. 
173. In the energy sector, close co-operation between interested national authorities was 
being ensured by the National Energy Co-ordination Board, which had instructed the National 
Atomic Energy Agency to conduct a feasibility study for Indonesia's first nuclear power 
plant. The first part of the study, covering economic and technical aspects, would be 
completed by the end of the year; the second part, containing a site evaluation, an 
environmental impact analysis and a safety assessment, would be completed by early 1996. 
Indonesia appreciated the Agency's assistance in that connection, particularly with the 
evaluation of initial draft documents. 
174. Within the framework of RCA, Indonesia had in July hosted a very useful meeting 
on project formulation in the field of energy and nuclear power planning. 
175. His Government, which appreciated the Agency's continued efforts to promote the 
safety of nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities, hoped that the work on safety 
principles for future nuclear power plants would be completed soon. The recommendations 
would be particularly useful for countries that were embarking on their own nuclear power 
programmes. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 40 

176. His Government had earlier that month ratified both the Convention on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a 
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. The required points of contact had been 
established directly after the signing of the Conventions, in 1986, and the required 
infrastructure had now been set up. 
177. One of the problems Indonesia was currently facing was that of educating the general 
public about nuclear energy, and in particular about the acceptability of generating electricity 
from nuclear power. For several years the National Atomic Energy Agency had been 
dispatching experts to various parts of the country to give lectures and demonstrations on the 
safe use of nuclear energy, and the meetings had always aroused great interest in all sections 
of the population. In that context, his Government was grateful to the Agency for its 
assistance in convening a seminar in Jakarta on the topic "Nuclear Power and Public 
Acceptance" in November 1992. The seminar had been attended by about 100 participants 
from various institutions and from the mass media. 
178. Indonesia was grateful to those Member States which had assisted it in establishing 
a complex for nuclear research and development at Serpong. Other countries would be 
welcome to share in the use of the facilities. His Government was also offering the use of 
Indonesia's research and training facilities at Pasar Jumat Jakarta, Bandung and Yogyakarta 
within the framework of the Agency's technical assistance activities. 
179. Greater attention was now being paid in Indonesia to user-oriented programmes in 
areas such as food and agriculture, industry and earth sciences. In that regard, his authorities 
were happy to note that increasing numbers of experts from developing countries, including 
Indonesia, were now being selected as consultants to assist other developing countries in 
preparing for new nuclear projects. They believed that it was only through co-operation 
among all Member States of the Agency - large and small, developed and developing - that 
the aims of the Agency could be achieved. 
180. Mr. KIJINER (Marshall Islands) said that the United States nuclear testing 
programme in the Marshall Islands had been a major episode in the early years of the nuclear 
era, and his Government was very pleased that the Agency would now be able to assist the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 41 

Marshall Islands in evaluating the long-term effects of the detonations on Bikini and 
Enewetak, leaders of whose communities were present in the Marshall Islands delegation. 

181. The Marshall Islands strongly endorsed the important work being done by the 
Agency, especially its safety and safeguards programmes. Both his country and other Pacific 
island nations attached special importance to Agency efforts to stop the nations of East Asia 
from embarking on a nuclear arms race. They prayed that the nations of the world would 
come to an agreement on dismantling nuclear weapons. 
182. The Marshall Islands would never be a military power and most certainly would never 
seek to arm itself with nuclear weapons. Electricity generation by means of nuclear power 
plants was not likely to be a practical option for it for many years to come. The Marshall 
Islands would, however, be looking to the Agency for help in dealing with the after-effects 
of the 66 atmospheric weapons tests that the United States Government had conducted on 
Bikini and Enewetak between 1946 and 1958. Those tests had completely disrupted the 
traditional way of life in the northern region of the Marshall Islands. The communities of 
the Bikini and Enewetak Atolls had been forcibly removed to other locations, where they had 
endured severe privation while their ancestral homes had become test sites for mankind's 
most powerful explosives and had been subjected to a tremendous barrage of fission activity. 
Furthermore, many other Marshallese people had suffered from fallout from the tests, 
especially from the 15-megaton test on Bikini in 1954 that had deposited large quantities of 
radioactive debris on two communities downwind. 
183. The United States Government and his Government had set up programmes for 
dealing with the destruction and physical injury caused by the tests. In addition to a medical 
programme and environmental monitoring administered by the United States Department of 
Energy, his Government was operating programmes for evaluating the personal injury and 
environmental degradation caused by the tests and for providing compensatory services both 
to the people of Bikini and Enewetak and to the fallout victims. The objectives were to help 
the people who had suffered, to see that justice was served and, to the extent possible, to 
restore that small corner of the world to the way it had once been. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.357 
page 42 

184. He believed that the Agency could make an important contribution to the process of 
restoration, especially on Bikini and Enewetak. Over the past decade, the people of Bikini 
had developed plans for the rehabilitation and resettlement of their atoll and had made 
considerable progress in implementing those plans. With the backing of the Marshall Islands 
Government, they would be looking to the Agency for assistance in reviewing earlier 
environmental assessments carried out on Bikini, for technical advice during clean-up and 
rehabilitation operations and ultimately for assistance in establishing on Bikini a laboratory 
to monitor radiological conditions once the community had returned. In addition, the 
Government of the Marshall Islands might approach the Agency in the future for help with 
environmental monitoring at other locations and with matters relating to the health of the 
population. 
185. While several islands of the Enewetak Atoll had been resettled, the major part 
remained off-limits for the gathering of food crops. The people of Enewetak might request 
the Agency to carry out an independent review of previous assessments of the radiological 
conditions within the atoll. The most immediate need, however, was technical assistance for 
the Bikinians. 
186. Whatever requests the people of the Marshall Islands made of the Agency, they 
needed the reassurance that went with the independence of the Agency's technical experts. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
5 January 1994 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

Original: ENGLISH and 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 
FRENCH 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 29 September 1993, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
Later: Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) 
Later: Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) 
Later: Mr. SANGIAMBUT (Thailand) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

8 
General debate and annual report for 1992 
(continued) 1 -211 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Netherlands 1 - 12 
Lebanon 13 - 21 
Nigeria 22 - 35 
Austria 36 - 53 
Syrian Arab Republic 54 - 57 
Sri Lanka 58- 72 
Portugal 73 - 79 

Egypt 80- 93 
Norway 94 - 110 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 111 - 120 
Algeria 121 - 135 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-03805 (IV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 2 

Item of the 
agenda* 

ABACC 
ARCAL 

ASEAN 
Biological Weapons 
Convention 

CIS 
DPRK 
EBRD 
EURATOM 
FAO 
G-24 
HEU 
LEU 
NDT 
NEA 
NPT 
NUSSAG 
OAU 
OECD 
PLO 
R&D 
RCA 

RIA 
SAGSI 
SAGSTRAM 
START 
TACF 
UNDP 
WHO 
WWER 

Paragraphs 

Viet Nam 136 - 142 
Ireland 143 - 158 
Philippines 159 - 173 
Thailand 174 - 176 
South Africa 177 - 189 
Ukraine 190-211 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 
Technology in Latin America 
Association of South East Asian Nations 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling 
of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Group of Twenty-Four 
High-enriched uranium 
Low-enriched uranium 
Non-destructive testing 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory Group 
Organization of African Unity 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Palestinian Liberation Organization 
Research and development 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (for Asia and the Pacific) 
Radioimmunoassay 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Standing Advisory Group on the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
United Nations Development Programme 
World Health Organization 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (continued) 

1. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands), having congratulated Dr. Hans Blix on his 
appointment as Director General for a further term, said that the Netherlands delegation 
endorsed the statement which had been made by the representative of Belgium on behalf of 
the European Community and its Member States. 
2. The Agency was still confronted with serious financial constraints. Against the 
background of the challenges currently facing it, there was a continuing need to set clear 
priorities and reduce costs wherever possible. At the same time, Member States should pay 
their contributions in full and in a timely fashion; that was essential for the proper 
functioning of the Agency. Member States should also pay their full shares of the TACF 
target. The Netherlands, which was pledging US $900 900 as its contribution to the TACF 
for 1994, was increasingly concerned about the continuing discrepancy between the TACF 
target shares of and the contributions actually made by several Member States. If the 
discrepancy persisted, the Netherlands might be forced to reconsider its position with regard 
to the TACF. 
3. Turning to the nuclear safety situation in countries of Central and Eastern Europe and 
the CIS, he said his Government appreciated the initiatives taken by the Agency in order to 
improve the safety of nuclear power plants in those countries. The Netherlands supported 
the Agency's extrabudgetary programme on WWER-type plants and attached great 
importance to the technical support being provided by the Agency within the G-24 
co-ordination framework. 
4. His Government welcomed the progress made by the Group of Experts drafting a 
nuclear safety convention and would join in working towards an early conclusion of that 
convention. Also, his Government was very much looking forward to the start of work on 
drafting a convention on safety in waste management as soon as agreement had been reached 
on the relevant safety fundamentals. 
5. In addition to its role under the envisaged nuclear safety convention, the Agency 
clearly had a statutory role to play in enhancing the exchange of information on regulatory 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 4 

experience and in codifying good safety practices - for example, through the recently 
established Regulatory Peer Discussions Programme. 

6. Referring to the various activities to be conducted under the Nuclear Safety Standards 
(NUSS) programme, he said that a body like NUSSAG could play a useful role in guiding 
and co-ordinating them. 
7. In the Netherlands, the results of Government studies on nuclear power safety, waste 
management, non-proliferation and environmental protection would be available shortly. 
They should enable decisions to be taken concerning a possible expansion of the country's 
nuclear power capacity. 
8. Developments which just a few years previously would have seemed impossible were 
taking place on the world security scene, and the role of the Agency had become more 
prominent as a result. The non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the opportunities 
offered by the peaceful applications of nuclear science and energy were matters of concern 
not only for governments but increasingly also for society as a whole. It was against that 
background that his Government firmly supported the Agency's efforts to strengthen the 
safeguards system, for the viability of the NPT regime depended on credible verification. 
The recommendations made by S AGSI in that connection were of the utmost importance, and 
his Government looked forward to the Director General's proposals for implementing them. 
The New Partnership Approach agreed on by EURATOM and the Agency was also very 
important. 
9. Noting that a safeguards system applied universally would have greater credibility, 
he said that since the accession of South Africa to the NPT progress had been made towards 
making Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone - a laudable example for other regions. The 
growing understanding among the countries of the Middle East was an important step on the 
way to political stability and economic co-operation in that region. Adherence by all 
countries of the region to the NPT's provisions appeared to have become a realistic prospect. 
10. Satisfactory implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and 
the DPRK was indispensable if the credibility of the safeguards system was to be maintained, 
and the Netherlands fully supported the efforts of the Director General in that direction. He 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 5 

recalled, in that connection, the firm and unequivocal position taken by the 12 member States 
of the European Community regarding the non-compliance of the DPRK with its obligations 
under the NPT and its NPT safeguards agreement. 

11. In the coming year, the Agency would have the important task of preparing for an 
extension of the NPT. A favourable atmosphere in that respect had been created by inter 
alia - the decision of the Conference on Disarmament to start negotiations on a 
comprehensive nuclear test ban and the voluntary moratoria on nuclear testing announced by 
four of the five nuclear-weapon States, in which connection he urged China to announce such 
a voluntary moratorium as well. They, together with such important developments as the 
ratification of START I and n, under which the United States and the Russian Federation 
would considerably reduce their nuclear arsenals, gave grounds for hope that the NPT would 
be extended unconditionally. The importance of the NPT could not be overstated, for it was 
the only formal framework which bound together an ever-growing number of States in a 
solemn undertaking not to rely on nuclear weapons for their security. In the period leading 
up to the 1995 Review and Extension Conference, that framework would have to be 
strengthened and defended by the Agency's Member States, which would have to be both 
very demanding and - above all - constructive. In that connection, he was pleased to say that 
a positive attitude had prevailed during the first session of the committee responsible for the 
Conference preparations, which had been chaired by the Netherlands. 
12. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the few countries still not members of 
the NPT family would ultimately be convinced that it was in everybody's interest to make 
the NPT as universal in adherence as it already was in scope. 
13. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) said that, following the international 
developments of the past few years, the Agency had an important role to play in promoting 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the world and preventing nuclear proliferation, which 
might lead to destructive wars that would only increase the misery of mankind. In order to 
accomplish its tasks, the Agency should continue its efforts to strengthen the safeguards 
system, and to achieve the early conclusion of a nuclear safety convention giving it the right 
to verify safety and radiation protection standards at nuclear facilities and to monitor the 
production and use of raw materials. To that end, all States should co-operate with the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 6 

Agency by giving it the right to carry out inspections so as to ensure that nuclear energy was 
used for exclusively peaceful purposes. The steady reduction of stocks of nuclear weapons 
which recent developments and the new trend towards peace made possible would enable 
savings to be achieved that could be invested in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, thereby 
helping to improve the standard of living in developing countries. 

14. The main objective of strengthening the Agency's technical assistance and training 
activities should be to enhance the capabilities of developing countries and the practical 
applications of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The approach of the twenty-first 
century heralded an era in which technology would occupy a privileged position and the 
practical applications of nuclear energy would contribute to prosperity and stability in the 
world. The peoples living in developing countries had the right and the duty to join in 
efforts to improve standards of living and to ensure regular food supplies, the availability of 
adequate water, and proper health care. Also, they had the right to help in increasing 
industrial and agricultural production and to participate in environmental protection activities. 
15. Technology transfer undoubtedly contributed to the progress of developing countries 
and made it possible to raise new generations aware of the dangers, but also the advantages 
of nuclear energy. Whatever the methods and applications, priority should be given to 
nuclear safety and radiation protection, which were essential to the success of any nuclear 
activity. Nuclear safety and radiation protection should form part of school curricula in the 
same way as mathematics, languages or sciences. In the developing countries, bringing forth 
a new generation familiar with such things as nuclear terminology, the biological effects of 
radiation and dose calculation methods was the starting point for more active participation 
in the use of nuclear methods in agriculture, medicine and industry. Furthermore, the 
exchange of information about radiation accidents should be promoted and strengthened, and 
lessons should be learned with a view to avoiding a repetition of such accidents. Lastly, as 
food irradiation was of considerable interest to developing countries, the Agency should 
provide such countries with the technology which they need in order to develop their own 
food industries. 
16. With regard to the Agency's financial situation, in view of the adverse effects that 
budgetary reductions could have on the technical co-operation programme, which was one 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 7 

of the Agency's essential activities and of vital interest to developing countries, it was 
important that that programme be financed from assured sources on a regular basis. 
Continued zero real growth in the budget could restrict the Agency's activities, and it would 
therefore be better to have real growth so as to help meet the needs of developing countries 
and give the Agency's activities a certain stability. 

17. The supply of water could be a matter of peace or war. Water shortages and 
population growth could lead to numerous conflicts between the countries concerned. The 
Middle East, like many other regions of the world, was suffering from a shortage of water 
which could become irremediable. The countries in those regions were relying heavily on 
the Agency to develop nuclear techniques for the economic desalination of seawater. His 
delegation, which welcomed the steps already taken in that respect, hoped that the Agency 
would make every effort to achieve the desired results as soon as possible and that it would 
receive the support of all relevant specialized institutions and organizations. 
18. There was no doubt that the Agency, in recruiting its staff, took account of a number 
of criteria such as calibre of work, competence, specialization and integrity. It was also true 
that the necessary qualities could be found in nationals from all Member States. It was 
therefore important to adhere to the quota principle so that the Agency's staff represented all 
Member States equitably. Highly qualified women, particularly from developing countries, 
should also be recruited for scientific and technical Professional posts, so that by the 
year 2000 women from all regions would be participating actively in the various areas of 
Agency activity. 
19. With regard to Article VI of the Agency's Statute, his delegation considered that it 
had become essential to amend it in the light of the changes that had occurred at all levels 
since the Agency's establishment. Those changes made it necessary to increase the number 
of Board members so as to ensure equitable geographical representation and thereby improve 
the effectiveness of the Board and its deliberations. 
20. The Middle East issue was a very important one and continued to be of worldwide 
concern. People living in the region, like all those who were participating in the search for 
a solution, would be satisfied only when a just and lasting peace based on the implementation 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 8 

of international resolutions had been established and when the occupier of southern Lebanon 
and the West Bekaa Valley realized that the oppressed populations in the occupied territories 
had no choice but to resist in defence of their land and their rights. Despite the few 
glimmers of hope, global peace could be achieved only if all the parties concerned renounced 
nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction, acceded to the NPT and submitted 
all their nuclear activities to Agency safeguards. The Director General's commendable 
efforts to apply Agency safeguards and to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle 
East would be in vain if Israel did not accede to the NPT and submit all its nuclear activities 
to safeguards. So far Israel had refused to co-operate in the implementation of the 
resolutions adopted on that subject. Also, it had not participated in the seminar organized 
by the Agency from 4 to 7 May 1993. The peace for which Lebanon longed was a challenge 
which would reveal the real intentions of all concerned. Would Israel fulfil its obligations 
and would the Agency and those who played an important role in it treat all States equally? 
Time would soon tell. 

21. In conclusion, he thanked the Agency for having resumed its provision of technical 
assistance to Lebanon and for having organized missions to determine what the country 
needed for the implementation of its recovery, development and reconstruction plan. 
22. Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), commending the Agency's efforts aimed at promoting 
non-power uses of nuclear energy, which were of great benefit to developing Member States 
like Nigeria, said that his country attached great importance to the transfer of nuclear 
technology to developing countries. Those efforts should be intensified, and a proper balance 
should be maintained between the Agency's promotional and non-promotional activities so 
as to ensure that the principal objectives of the Statute were not compromised. 
23. The Nigerian delegation noted with satisfaction the significant progress which had 
been made in strengthening the Agency's safeguards system. It welcomed and fully 
associated itself with the specific measures taken to enhance the Agency's role and to 
increase the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of the safeguards system. He had noted the 
Director General's assurance that those objectives would continue to be a major 
preoccupation in the coming years and wished to assure the Director General that Nigeria 
would continue to offer its co-operation. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 9 

24. In that connection, he wished to place on record his delegation's appreciation of the 
work being done by SAGSI. His delegation was convinced that, with the support and 
encouragement of Member States, the Director General would be able to achieve a high level 
of cost-effectiveness in the safeguards system without sacrificing efficiency. He expressed 
his country's appreciation to those Member States which had volunteered to co-operate with 
the Secretariat in testing new measures recommended by SAGSI and said that the Nigerian 
delegation looked forward to examining concrete proposals on SAGSI's recommendations with 
the legal, financial and political implications taken into account - later in the year. 
25. The Nigerian delegation was deeply concerned about the Agency's serious financial 
situation and regretted that in the course of the year it had resulted in a number of approved 
programmes being cut or deferred. It therefore hoped that Member States in arrears with 
their Regular Budget contributions would take urgent steps to meet their statutory obligations. 
It also hoped that Member States would endeavour to make future payments promptly. 
26. Many developing countries such as Nigeria benefited from the TACF, and the decline 
in the amounts pledged and actually paid into it was therefore a source of concern. In 1992, 
there had been a sharp decline in the value of contributions in major non-convertible 
currencies. That, together with a decline in the extrabudgetary amounts received from 
UNDP and elsewhere and in assistance in kind, had had a negative impact on the quantum 
of resources available for technical assistance. The situation was highly unsatisfactory and 
should be rectified. 
27. The Agency was, more than ever before, paying attention to the use of nuclear 
techniques in dealing with environmental problems, and considerable success had been 
achieved in demonstrating the potential of such techniques, through meetings, consultant 
services and co-ordinated research programmes. Many developing countries had severe 
water problems, and support should therefore continue to be given to the national institutions 
in such countries concerned with the use of nuclear techniques in assessing water resources 
and water pollution. 
28. Expressing appreciation of the support which his country had received from the 
Agency in various areas where nuclear techniques were applied, he said that in June the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 10 

Ministry of Petroleum and Mineral Resources had, in collaboration with one of its nuclear 
research centres, organized a workshop on radiation safety in the Nigerian petroleum 
industry - the largest importer and user of radioisotopes in Nigeria. During the workshop, 
in which the Agency had participated, recommendations had been made regarding inter 
alia - the promulgation in Nigeria of a law on nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
Machinery had been set up to ensure the early enactment of such a law, and Nigeria looked 
forward to the Agency's co-operating in the drafting exercise. 

29. A major problem facing developing countries was that of providing adequate food for 
their ever-increasing populations. Food irradiation could well become important in that 
connection, for a substantial number of developing countries had the potential for introducing 
food irradiation on a commercial scale. Believing that in the medium or long term 
restrictions on international trade in irradiated foodstuffs would ease, to the benefit of people 
everywhere in the world, Nigeria had taken steps to enable its entrepreneurs to benefit from 
the efforts currently being made to improve food safety and would shortly discuss with the 
Secretariat how appropriate assistance could be provided. 
30. In general, the Nigerian delegation was satisfied with the Secretariat's continuing 
emphasis on projects dealing with food and agriculture and with the physical and chemical 
sciences in the distribution of technical assistance. Also, given the exceptional needs of 
African Member States, it was pleased that Africa accounted for an increasing share of the 
disbursed funds. The current welcome trend had been accompanied by efforts aimed at a 
gradual redirection of the technical co-operation programme towards more end-user oriented 
projects and at ensuring that the links between technical co-operation projects and the overall 
development objectives of recipient countries were strengthened. Nigeria fully endorsed and 
commended the Secretariat on - an imaginative approach. 
31. The Nigerian delegation, which had noted the progress made with regard to the 
Professional and higher-category staff of the Secretariat, believed that further efforts were 
necessary in order to rectify the existing imbalances. He reiterated his delegation's strong 
support for the appointment of suitably qualified women from all geographical areas with a 
view to ensuring a significant increase in the representation of women in the Professional and 
higher categories by the year 2000. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 11 

32. The Nigerian delegation had studied with interest the report of the Director General, 
in Attachment 1 to document GC(XXXVII)/1075, on the Agency's verification activities in 
South Africa, and considered that remarkable progress had been made in the implementation 
of the NPT safeguards agreement between the Agency and South Africa, particularly with 
regard to the verification of the completeness of the inventory of South Africa's nuclear 
installations and material. Also, it was grateful for the Agency's assessment of the status of 
South Africa's former nuclear weapons programme. 
33. It was reassuring that, following additional visits by the Agency team entrusted with 
the verification of the completeness of the inventory of South Africa's nuclear installations 
and material, the magnitude of the discrepancy in the uranium-235 balance reported the 
previous year (in document GC(XXXVI)/1015) for the pilot enrichment plant had now been 
substantially reduced - to the level of the uncertainties normally associated with the operation 
of a plant of that nature. His delegation expected that further Agency investigations of 
uncertainties reported for the semi-commercial enrichment plant would also lead to 
satisfactory clarifications in due course. 
34. Nigeria, which had welcomed South Africa's disclosure of 24 March 1993 regarding 
the abandonment of its nuclear weapons programme, welcomed the prompt action taken by 
the Agency to assess and report on the status of that programme. It also welcomed the cooperation 
which the Agency had received from the South African authorities in the process 
of the assessment, which confirmed that South Africa had abandoned the programme before 
acceding to the NPT and that the programme had been dismantled. That had greatly 
enhanced the prospects for making Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Nigeria hoped that 
the Secretariat would continue its excellent co-operation with the Organization of African 
Unity (OAU) and the United Nations in elaborating a draft treaty on the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and that other Member States would support that 
important effort, the results of which would have a major impact on worldwide nonproliferation. 
35. In conclusion, the Nigerian delegation welcomed the appointment of Dr. Blix as 
Director General for a further term of office. He had demonstrated immense competence 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 12 

as an administrator and great sensitivity - especially in matters of interest to Africa, and to 
Nigeria in particular. 

Mr. Jamal (Qatar) took the Chair. 

36. Mr. MARSCHIK (Austria) said that the far-reaching political changes that had 
occurred in the world during recent years had had significant implications for the political 
environment in which the Agency operated. 
37. Although by no means assured, there now appeared - for the first time - to be a real 
chance of: significant reductions in nuclear armaments following the conclusion of START I 
and II; a complete and comprehensive cessation of nuclear weapons tests in all environments 
now that negotiations for a comprehensive test ban treaty were to start in Geneva early 
in 1994; an effective and functioning international control regime to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons being established now that all nuclear-weapon States had become parties 
to the NPT and with the approach of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference. 
There seemed to be growing support for an improved and strengthened safeguards system 
and, in general, a growing willingness to co-operate in reducing and controlling the risks 
involved in the use of nuclear energy. 
38. That new international situation could well mean new challenges for the Agency: an 
expanded role for Agency safeguards in support of increased international non-proliferation 
efforts; a role in safeguarding nuclear material that would have to be stored in the event of 
large-scale dismantling of nuclear weapons; and a role in the verification of a treaty banning 
all nuclear weapons tests. 
39. Austria continued to consider the Agency's work on the nuclear safety front 
particularly important. In many countries, including his own, anxiety remained high about 
possible hazards associated with nuclear power plants, and particularly with the continued 
operation of certain older reactors of Soviet design in Eastern and Central Europe. The 
advice and assistance given by the Agency to Member States in analysing the problems 
presented by those reactors was of great importance, and Austria trusted that the Agency 
would continue - and where necessary expand - the activities in question. Also, Austria 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 13 

hoped that all countries concerned would give very serious consideration to the Agency's 
recommendations. 

40. Everything should be done to ensure that the operation of nuclear power plants was 
as safe as possible. Austria welcomed all national and international efforts directed towards 
that goal, and it was in that context that Austria viewed its contribution to the extrabudgetary 
programme on the safety of East European reactors. He was glad that Austrian experts, 
along with experts from other Member States, had been able to contribute to that programme. 
41. At the bilateral level, the Austrian Government had continued to pursue its efforts to 
promote a dialogue and an exchange of information on nuclear safety and radiation protection 
matters with countries in its immediate and wider neighbourhood. Agreements with a 
number of those countries were already contributing to the maintenance and improvement of 
neighbourly relations, and further agreements were in process of negotiation. 
42. An important step in international endeavours to enhance nuclear safety would be the 
establishment of an appropriate legal infrastructure, particularly through early agreement on 
a nuclear safety convention. For years, Austria had been calling for the adoption of 
internationally binding nuclear safety standards and the mandatory global monitoring by the 
Agency of compliance with them. 
43. His country found it difficult to accept the fact that nuclear safety should invariably 
be regarded as a matter of exclusive national responsibility and jurisdiction when recent 
events had demonstrated tragically the transboundary - even transcontinental - consequences 
of major nuclear accidents. In that area, as in the related area of nuclear liability, an extra 
effort of political will and imagination would be required in order to achieve more 
satisfactory solutions. 
44. His delegation was pleased that the expert talks convened by the Agency on a nuclear 
safety convention had made considerable progress. Although his country would have 
preferred a more comprehensive approach to such a convention, it could for the time being 
go along with an approach covering only nuclear power plants, on the understanding that 
other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle would subsequently be taken up without delay. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 14 

45. With regard to the current negotiations on a new liability regime for nuclear damage, 
the prospects did not seem very encouraging. It might be true that substantial progress had 
been made in the formulation of certain texts, but there appeared to have been little progress 
on what Austria considered the main issue - improving the legal and material situation of 
victims of the transboundary effects of a nuclear accident. That issue was of special interest 
to countries which, although having no major nuclear installations on their own territories, 
faced the prospect of damage originating at nearby nuclear sites. 
46. Austria supported the leading role of the Agency with regard to safety in the transport 
of radioactive materials and appreciated the fact that, under the guidance of SAGSTRAM, 
the relevant regulations underwent continuous review in the light of the latest technical and 
scientific advances so that they might form the basis for national and modal legislation. 
47. His country, which was supporting the current efforts to strengthen the effectiveness 
and improve the efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system, believed that international 
security must be backed by a strong and reliable non-proliferation regime. 
48. Everything possible should be done to provide confidence that no clandestine nuclear 
activities were being conducted anywhere in the world. That might mean going beyond the 
safeguards task traditionally performed by the Agency, but Austria was convinced that all 
efforts to that end should be concentrated within a single organization - namely the Agency. 
The extension of the Agency's work to include the detection of undeclared activities was an 
important contribution to the credibility both of the Agency and of the non-proliferation 
regime. In that connection, and particularly in connection with the efforts to develop a 
comprehensive or integrated safeguards system, he recalled that at the General Conferences' 
1992 session the Austrian delegation and the delegation of the Czech Republic had presented 
a non-paper outlining certain ideas on the structure and content of such a modified system. 
49. Austria welcomed the recommendations made by SAGSI earlier in the year on how 
to strengthen and streamline safeguards activities - and in particular on alternative 
approaches. There were now many ideas on the table, and the time was ripe to implement 
them. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 15 

50. Austria, which was pleased that in 1992 further important countries had acceded to 
the NPT, hoped that all countries which had not yet done so would adhere to the Treaty 
soon. It also hoped that those States parties to the NPT which had not yet concluded the 
required safeguards agreements with the Agency would lose no time in complying with the 
treaty obligation in question. 
51. His country, which was also pleased that the DPRK had not put into effect its 
intention to withdraw from the NPT, hoped that the DPRK would maintain that position and 
that it would co-operate fully with the Agency in implementing the NPT safeguards 
agreement and in resolving outstanding safeguards issues. 
52. Technical assistance and co-operation, involving well over 1000 operational projects, 
remained one of the Agency's main activities. It was reassuring for his Government when 
supporting the technical assistance and co-operation programme that most technical assistance 
requests from Member States related to non-power applications of nuclear energy, especially 
in human health, food and agriculture, the physical and chemical sciences, and radiation 
protection. Also, his Government was pleased that emphasis was now being placed on the 
requirements of requesting countries as seen by those countries and on infrastructural 
improvements. 
53. In conclusion, as representative of the host country he extended a warm welcome to 
all delegates and expressed continued support for the Agency, which for nearly four decades 
had been a highly valued member of the family of international organizations and of Vienna's 
international community. 
54. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) said that the items on the General 
Conference's agenda could be regarded as falling under three major headings: promotion 
of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy; non-proliferation measures and prevention of 
the utilization of nuclear energy for non-peaceful purposes; and strengthening of the 
Agency's capacity for action. 
55. With regard to the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, the Agency had, through 
the provision of training and basic equipment, enabled many developing countries to acquire 
the necessary technical competence. The next step should be to put the accent on certain 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 

page 16 

activities: the use of nuclear techniques in geological prospecting for nuclear raw materials 
and other minerals and in the determination of groundwater resources; the use of nuclear 
power in seawater desalination; and the use of nuclear techniques in molecular biology, 
biotechnology and immunology. Also, the principles of nuclear power plant safety should 
be further developed, the efforts to produce electricity through nuclear fusion should continue 
to be supported and ways should be found of ensuring reliable, regular and increasing 
resources for technical assistance and co-operation. His delegation believed that excessive 
centralization should be avoided through, for example, the establishment of regional centres 
responsible for initiating and supporting activities in areas such as electronic equipment 
maintenance, biology and medicine. Also, it hoped that the Agency would intensify its 
bilateral co-operation with those developing countries which placed at its disposal trust funds 
to be used in the acquisition of scientific equipment necessary for technical co-operation 
projects approved for implementation in their territories. 

56. With regard to the utilization of nuclear energy for non-peaceful purposes, his 
delegation was optimistic. On one hand, the two big nuclear Powers had drawn closer 
together and initiated steps to reduce their nuclear arsenals and stop nuclear testing; on the 
other, several regional groups had concluded agreements on the creation of nuclear-weaponfree 
zones. He hoped that those developments would lead to the destruction of the nuclear 
weapons in the world. Recalling the legal instruments - including the recent agreement 
between Brazil and Argentina - designed to make Latin America a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
and the fact that South Africa had destroyed all its nuclear weapons and acceded to the NPT, 
he said that there were countries in the Middle East endeavouring to create a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone there also. Most countries in the Middle East had acceded to the NPT and placed 
all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards, and he wondered whether Israel - the 
only Middle East country with nuclear weapons - would follow South Africa's example and 
comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security Council and the Agency's General 
Conference and with the wishes of the peoples of the region and the whole world. He also 
wondered whether the Agency and other international organizations would make a special 
effort to persuade Israel to take an initiative similar to that taken by South Africa. In 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 17 

addition, his delegation hoped that the two Koreas would continue talking and negotiating at 
all levels in the interests of a non-confrontational resolution of their differences. 

57. With regard to the Agency's capacity for action, his delegation welcomed the fact that 
further countries had been approved for membership of the Agency and looked forward to 
co-operating with them in furthering the Agency's work. He believed that the time had come 
to expand the Board of Governors and modify its composition in such a way as to do justice 
to certain regions; that would help to promote confidence and reduce the differences of view 
within the Agency. The geographical factor should carry as much weight as the nuclear 
capacity of Member States. With the climate of detente now prevailing in the world and the 
steady increase in the number of Agency Member States, the call for an amendment of 
Article VI of the Statute was becoming still stronger. Article VI had been drafted not long 
after the Second World War, at the time of the Cold War, when the distribution of roles and 
balance of forces had been different from what they were now, and the States which were 
apprehensive about amending it should pluck up the courage to settle for a reasonable, 
acceptable and balanced solution. 
58. Mr. PRINATH DIAS (Sri Lanka), after commending the Agency on an 
impressive record of achievement in many parts of the world, said his delegation believed 
that the international community had a responsibility to co-operate with the Agency in 
ensuring that nuclear technology was not misused for military purposes. The safeguards 
agreements concluded by the Agency were a sufficient basis for co-operation to that end as 
long as the States entering into them complied fully with the obligations which they imposed. 
Now that the world was free of the bipolar confrontation which had used up valuable 
resources, damaged the environment and diverted technology for non-peaceful purposes, the 
possibility of achieving greater international responsibility and co-operation in the nuclear 
domain no longer seemed so remote. 
59. In that regard, the recent announcements by the United States, France and the Russian 
Federation that they were extending the nuclear test moratoria had led to various international 
initiatives; for example, the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva had given its Ad Hoc 
Committee on a Nuclear Test Ban a mandate to start negotiating a comprehensive test ban 
treaty in 1994. If a total test ban treaty regime became a reality, the international community 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 18 

would need to consider what role the Agency should play in the new circumstances. His 
delegation hoped that a comprehensive test ban treaty would enable international resources 
to be harnessed in such a way that nuclear technology was used more widely, exclusively for 
peaceful purposes and on a non-discriminatory basis. In view of the interdependent nature 
of the emerging world order, attitudes in certain parts of the world would need to change in 
order to ensure successful technology transfer and further strengthening of the safeguards 
system. 

60. His Government welcomed the South African Government's voluntary disclosure of 
its past nuclear weapons programme, but it was still very concerned about the potential 
dangers of such undisclosed programmes. It was likewise concerned about the nuclear 
arsenals and facilities in countries of the former Soviet Union which, like many other parts 
of the world, were in a volatile state characterized by rising nationalism and violent conflicts. 
The role of the Agency was going to be a delicate one, and the Agency would have to act 
with complete impartiality in seeking solutions acceptable to all - and particularly when 
endeavouring to eliminate the risks associated with a proliferation of nuclear materials, knowhow 
and technology and with the absence of centralized arrangements for ensuring an 
acceptable level of nuclear safety. 
61. The present concern with safeguards which was evident within the Agency's policymaking 
bodies should not be allowed to detract from the Agency's role of promoting the 
peaceful uses of nuclear technology and providing technical assistance to developing 
countries. The strengthening of all the Agency's main activities should remain a priority. 
In a similar vein, his delegation hoped that the outcome of the 1995 NPT Review and 
Extension Conference would not enhance the role of the Agency in implementing the NPT 
to the detriment of its promotional programmes. 
62. His delegation was very interested in the progress being made by the Group of 
Experts drafting a nuclear safety convention. Also, it hoped that the current work on 
devising a new nuclear liability regime would soon produce useful results. 
63. With regard to the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries, his 
delegation was interested in the techno-economic feasibility studies which had been or were 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 19 

to be carried out under the Action Plan adopted by the Board of Governors in February. 
While acknowledging the limitations of irradiation techniques, particularly in developing 
countries, his delegation believed that in the long run an international food irradiation plan, 
with the Agency in a central role, could alleviate the food problems of developing countries. 
Accordingly, he hoped that the Agency would continue its efforts in co-operation with 
organizations such as FAO and WHO. 

64. Turning to his country's atomic energy programme, he said that his Government, in 
recognition of the contribution nuclear technology had made to Sri Lanka's development, had 
allocated funds for the construction of new facilities for the National Atomic Energy 
Authority (NAEA) which would be completed in 1995. 
65. With no large nuclear facilities and no plans to acquire any in the near future, 
Sri Lanka was concentrating on applications of nuclear techniques in industry, medicine and 
agriculture. The NAEA co-ordinated the activities of the institutes concerned with such 
applications and provided radiation protection, nuclear electronic equipment repair and 
maintenance, X-ray fluorescence and various other services. 
66. Medical applications of nuclear technology in Sri Lanka included the use of in vitro 
RIA methods and in vivo nuclear imaging techniques in disease diagnosis. Improved 
radiation techniques for cancer therapy had been introduced, and RIA was being used in the 
scanning of donor blood for the hepatitis-B virus prior to transfusion. Sri Lanka had 
submitted to the Agency a proposal for a model project on the radiation sterilization and 
banking of tissue grafts. In view of his country's long experience of sterilizing and banking 
eye corneas, the Sri Lankan authorities were confident that the project would benefit not only 
Sri Lanka but also end-users in other parts of the world. 
67. In Sri Lanka's industrial sector, research and development work on the radiation 
vulcanization of natural rubber latex had shown that the prospects were good for introducing 
that technique on a commercial basis in the near future. The NAEA had established a 
capability for providing non-destructive testing services and was conducting demonstrations 
of tracer technology applications. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 20 

68. In hydrology, radioactive tracer and environmental isotope methods had been 
successfully used in solving practical problems connected with the exploitation of 
groundwater resources and with seepage from irrigation canals and reservoirs. Caesium-137 
fallout studies had been conducted in successfully dealing with the twin problem of soil 
erosion and water body siltation. 
69. The use of nuclear techniques had produced significant changes in agriculture. The 
main areas of application included the development of superior varieties of rice and mung 
bean through irradiation-induced mutation breeding, soil improvement, water and fertilizer 
management for enhanced crop production, the biological fixation of atmospheric nitrogen 
by plants, and animal production and health. 
70. The generation of electrical energy by means of nuclear power was not at present a 
viable option for Sri Lanka, since the capacity of the power reactors currently available on 
a commercial basis was too large for its needs. Unfortunately, although several conceptual 
designs of small and medium power reactors had been in existence for more than a decade, 
none of them had been proven yet. A number of developing countries, including Sri Lanka, 
would stand to gain if small and medium power reactors became commercially available. 
71. His country had benefited significantly from most of the activities organized within 
the context of the RCA, which now covered all aspects of nuclear science and technology, 
and in particular from the ten-year Agency/UNDP/RCA project on industrial applications. 
His delegation was particularly pleased that UNDP had agreed to provide a major share of 
the funding for a new project on "The use of isotopes and radiation to strengthen technology 
and support environmentally sustainable development". 
72. In conclusion, he reiterated his delegation's support for the Agency's programmes and 
activities, which had been very effective in promoting the application of nuclear science and 
technology for development and without which developing countries such as Sri Lanka would 
have made little or no progress in the nuclear field. 
73. Mr. VALERIO (Portugal), after associating himself with the statement made 
by the delegate of Belgium on behalf of the 12 member States of the European Community, 
said that nuclear non-proliferation was vital for the maintenance of international peace and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 21 

security and that universality of the NPT offered the best way of achieving that objective. 
Accordingly, the NPT should in 1995 be extended unconditionally for an indefinite period. 

74. Portugal believed that it was necessary to continue strengthening the effectiveness and 
improving the efficiency of Agency safeguards, and in that connection it welcomed the New 
Partnership Approach agreed upon by EURATOM and the Agency. 
75. His country, which supported the activities of the Nuclear Suppliers Group, had 
joined the other member States of the European Community in requiring the application of 
full-scope Agency safeguards in countries to which they exported nuclear materials and 
technologies, including dual-use ones. 
76. His country considered it important to strengthen the safeguards system through the 
voluntary declaration by Member States of their exports and imports of nuclear materials and 
sensitive equipment. 
77. Portugal had not opted for nuclear power, but it was obviously interested in 
improving the safety of nuclear facilities. It was therefore following with great interest the 
efforts to draft a nuclear safety convention, which ultimately covered more than just power 
reactors; radioactive waste management and other fuel cycle facilities should be covered 
once an international consensus had been reached on the relevant basic safety principles. 
78. He expressed appreciation of the Agency's system of biennial technical co-operation 
programming, with which Portugal's experience had been very positive, and also of the 
support which Portuguese institutes had received from the Agency in nuclear research and 
the application of nuclear techniques. 
79. In conclusion, he also expressed appreciation of the way in which the Agency was run 
by Dr. Blix, whom he congratulated on his election as Director General for a further term. 
Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) resumed the Chair. 

80. Mr. ONSY (Egypt) said that the world was witnessing a series of events which 
augured well for a future in which international understanding and the end of the Cold War 
would lead to greater co-operation in all spheres and increase the chances of making science 
and knowledge accessible to all peoples without discrimination so that they might enjoy the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 22 

fruits of economic development and scientific and technical progress without confrontation 
or conflict. In that regard, Egypt particularly appreciated initiatives aimed at the peaceful 
resolution of conflicts, the progress made in reducing nuclear armaments levels, and the 
accession of new countries to the NPT. He looked forward to further developments along 
the same lines in the interests of peace and stability throughout the world. 

81. His delegation was confident that the Agency could persuade those States which had 
not yet acceded to the NPT and joined the safeguards system to change their position. The 
resolutions adopted by consensus at the two previous sessions of the General Conference 
concerning the application of safeguards in the Middle East were proof positive of the 
support of the international community and of its willingness to help achieve peace in the 
region through measures likely to create confidence among the parties concerned. With 
regard to the Director General's report on the matter, Egypt had supported the proposals 
regarding the obligations and the verification requirements and modalities to be included in 
an agreement establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Also, it had suggested new elements 
which might strengthen the application of safeguards within the framework of the envisaged 
agreement. Furthermore, it appreciated the Agency's participation in the meeting of the 
Multilateral Working Group on Arms Control and Regional Security held in Washington in 
May and the workshop which had taken place in Cairo in July. 
82. The Middle East had recently witnessed positive developments which should 
encourage all parties to support efforts aimed at putting an end to nuclear proliferation and 
making the Middle East a zone free not just of nuclear weapons but of all weapons of mass 
destruction, as Egypt - convinced that the attainment of that objective was essential to 
building confidence and ensuring stability and security - had proposed in April 1990. 
Recalling that General Assembly resolution 47/48 on the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East, in which all States of the region had been invited to accede to 
the NPT as a means of achieving that objective, had been adopted by consensus, he said his 
delegation hoped that the General Conference would, in its turn and as in previous years, 
adopt a resolution reflecting the support that the international community continued to lend 
to those efforts. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 23 

83. The African States, aware of the dangers associated with the presence of nuclear arms 
on their continent, were taking important steps to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
Africa and focusing their efforts on the strengthening of regional co-operation so that nuclear 
energy might be used in improving the living conditions of their populations, and they were 
counting on Agency support in that connection. The encouraging developments in question 
were taking place at the same time as historic changes within the framework of efforts to 
establish the foundations of a democratic regime in South Africa. Egypt strongly supported 
those efforts, which served the interests not only of the people of South Africa but also of 
the entire African community. 
84. The Agency was providing substantial technical assistance to developing countries in 
order to help them benefit from nuclear energy in such fields as research, medicine, 
agriculture, industry and the environment. The developed countries should give greater 
support to the Agency's technical co-operation projects, and the latter should be financed 
from predictable and assured resources so as to remain unaffected by the financial difficulties 
of the Agency and by the cut-backs associated with other activities. 
85. Egypt had made considerable progress in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
technology. A second multi-purpose research reactor was being constructed and the 
radioactive waste treatment facility built in collaboration with the Agency and the former 
Soviet Union was being commissioned. In addition, the radioisotope production facility had 
been modernized with the help of the Agency's technical co-operation programme in response 
to the country's needs, particularly in the medical sector, and work had started on the 
construction of a cyclotron for the production of short-lived isotopes. 
86. Turning to food irradiation, he said that Egypt had taken all necessary steps to start 
applying this technique in 1994. The matter had been examined in detail at two important 
meetings held in Cairo in the spring. The first, for the Middle East region and attended by 
representatives of 14 countries, had been organized in collaboration with FAO. The second, 
for Africa and attended by representatives of 12 countries, had been organized in cooperation 
with the Agency. All participants had acknowledged the benefits of food 
irradiation for Africa and the Middle East and the importance of co-operation between all 
countries in research and in applying the technology. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 24 

87. An important project designed to improve agricultural production in desert areas with 
the help of nuclear techniques was also making progress. The necessary infrastructure was 
already in place, and the project was receiving support from many countries. Egypt hoped 
that the Agency would also support the project, which should enable agriculture to be 
pursued with less water and chemical fertilizers and hence facilitate the establishment of 
communities in desert areas. 
88. With regard to nuclear safety and environmental protection, the first phase in 
establishing a national monitoring service and putting it into operation had been completed, 
with the setting up of 22 radiation measurement laboratories. The second phase, in which 
the number of laboratories would be doubled, had already started. In addition, steps were 
being taken to strengthen the country's capacity for dealing with radiological emergency 
situations and to update the corresponding national plan. 
89. For the first time in Egypt and on the African continent an experiment on the 
propagation of pollutant gases had been carried out at El-Daba, the site selected for the 
country's first nuclear power plant. Similar experiments would be carried out in other 
regions, in particular at Inshas, the site of the nuclear science and technology city where 
many of Egypt's nuclear installations were located. A marine radioactivity laboratory had 
been established in the Suez Canal region thanks to Agency assistance, and his delegation 
hoped one would also be established on the Red Sea coast in due course. 
90. Egypt had also made progress in nuclear electronics, in nuclear fuel studies and in 
basic and applied nuclear fusion research. In support of work in the last-mentioned field, 
it was currently constructing a small tokamak reactor near Inshas with assistance from 
Germany. Furthermore, thanks to strenuous efforts in prospecting for raw materials, in 
infrastructure development and in training personnel and exploiting local resources, Egypt 
should succeed in becoming more self-sufficient in the manufacture of nuclear power plant 
components. 
91. In view of its considerable interest in seawater desalination by means of nuclear 
power, Egypt had taken part in a study on the technical and economic feasibility of 
desalination in North Africa with local manufacture of desalination plant components. The 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 25 

study had demonstrated the advantages of nuclear desalination using small or medium power 
reactors. Owing to the interest shown by Arab countries, steps had been taken for the report 
in question to be translated into Arabic by the Agency. There might well be a practical 
follow-up to the study, given the fact that seawater desalination was very common in the Gulf 
countries and given the progress being made in the Middle East peace process. 

92. Egypt was well placed to provide training in final waste storage, food irradiation and 
nuclear power development for personnel from other Arab and African countries at its 
facilities. It was making all its resources available for strengthening regional co-operation 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - particularly within the framework of AFRA, for 
African countries needed the technical and financial support provided by the Agency and 
donor countries and also the experience acquired through RCA and ARCAL. 
93. Egypt, which had been participating in the work of the Group of Experts responsible 
for elaborating a nuclear safety convention, agreed that initially only power reactors should 
be covered, research reactors and fuel cycle facilities - especially nuclear waste management 
facilities - being covered subsequently. The industrialized States had recently celebrated the 
50th anniversary of the start of the nuclear era - a celebration in which the developing 
countries has not really been able to take part in view of their, as yet, very limited utilization 
of nuclear power. In that connection, Egypt proposed that, to mark the start of the second 
half-century of the nuclear era, the Agency organize a scientific meeting on all nuclear 
energy and safety issues of interest to developing countries, the aim being to show those 
countries how they might make greater use of nuclear energy for their economic and social 
development, to strengthen technical co-operation between the North and the South, and to 
establish a special fund in support of that co-operation on the lines of what was currently 
being done by the Group of 7 for the countries of Eastern Europe. 
Mr. Ryzhov (Russian Federation) took the Chair. 

94. Mr. AAMODT (Norway), associating himself with the Director General's 
repeated appeals to Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time, 
said it was likely that certain 1994 activities would have to be deferred and that certain 
activities deferred in earlier years would be proposed for implementation in 1994. In his 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 26 

delegation's view, priority should be given in a particular year to projects belonging to the 
programme for that year as they corresponded more closely to current needs. Since such an 
approach was not possible under the Financial Regulations as they stood at present, however, 
the situation called for fresh thinking on the part of the Secretariat during the comprehensive 
review of the Financial Regulations. 

95. Expressing support for the TACF target for 1994, he said that there had unfortunately 
been an overall decline not only in the fraction of the TACF target actually pledged 
(from 77.2% in 1991 to 71.6% in 1992), largely because the value of contributions in nonconvertible 
currencies had declined sharply, but also the implementation rate had 
(from 67.6% in 1991 to 61.9% in 1992). His delegation therefore wondered whether the 
TACF target should be raised as rapidly in the future as in the past. It would perhaps be 
better to ensure that the target was actually matched by pledges. 
96. Protection of the environment was of vital interest to the entire international 
community, and a substantial contribution in that area had been made by the Agency's 
"Nuclear applications" programme. His delegation was pleased that the Secretariat, in its 
contacts with other organizations of the United Nations system, was emphasizing the role 
which various nuclear applications could play in connection with the environmental issues 
confronting developing countries. 
97. Norway favoured a gradual redirection of the technical co-operation programme 
towards projects which were more carefully focused on end-user requirements, which had 
better cost-benefit ratios and which were more closely attuned to national development 
objectives. 
98. With regard to radiation protection, his delegation was pleased that work on drafting 
a code for the safe carriage of irradiated nuclear fuel, plutonium, and high-level radioactive 
wastes in flasks on board ships had been concluded. The Agency's safety services - such as 
the OSART and ASSET services, the Incident Reporting System and the International 
Nuclear Event Scale - were valuable, and he commended the Agency on its efforts to 
increase the transparency of those services. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 27 

99. His country felt that nuclear energy should not be used unless operating nuclear 
installations in all countries performed in accordance with the strictest safety and 
environmental protection standards and waste management practices. The early establishment 
of a convention on nuclear safety was crucial in that regard. Difficulties had been 
encountered in reaching consensus in the Group of Experts on a number of outstanding 
issues, including the scope of the convention. He hoped that consensus would be reached 
on a limited convention that could be submitted to a diplomatic conference in 1994. A 
convention covering only civil nuclear power reactors should, however, include a 
commitment to continue negotiations in order to establish international obligations regarding 
at least waste management and disposal at an early date thereafter. 
100. Norway, which was particularly concerned about the safety of nuclear installations 
in Eastern Europe, welcomed both the joint project of the Agency and UNDP aimed at 
strengthening the radiation protection and nuclear safety infrastructures in countries of the 
former Soviet Union and the Agency's efforts to assess the safety of Soviet-designed reactors. 
It had initiated co-operation with the Russian Federation in the nuclear safety area by 
providing 20 million Norwegian kroner to help improve the safety of the Kola nuclear power 
plant. 
101. His country was deeply concerned about the dumping of radioactive waste by the 
former Soviet Union in the Kara and Barents Seas and was co-operating with the Russian 
Federation and I he Agency in assessing its possible consequences within the framework of 
the International Arctic Seas Assessment Project, which had been launched earlier that year 
by the Agency. Under a bilateral agreement between the Russian Federation and Norway, 
an exploratory cruise to investigate -dumped materials had taken place, with the participation 
of an Agency representative the previous summer, and a second cruise, with representatives 
of the Agency and the European Community, was currently under way. The results of the 
first cruise had been presented recently at an international conference in Norway. The main 
conclusions were that the levels of radioactivity in the Kara and Barents Seas were still quite 
low, but that there were grounds for concern with regard to the radioactive situation in the 
future. The Norwegian government felt that a total prohibition of dumping of all forms of 
radioactive waste at sea should be incorporated into the Convention on the Prevention of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 28 

Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter (the London Dumping Convention 
of 1972), and it would like to see the scope of that convention extended to cover military 
waste. 

102. While noting that the Agency had not been able to confirm the correctness and 
completeness of the initial report submitted by the DPRK pursuant to its NPT safeguards 
agreement, his delegation was pleased that the DPRK had decided to postpone its withdrawal 
from the NPT. It hoped that the DPRK would remain a party to the NPT and looked 
forward to speedy and complete implementation of the DPRK's safeguards obligations. 
103. Welcoming the accession of further countries to the NPT and the entry into force of 
further safeguards agreements concluded pursuant to it, he said that Norway assumed that 
the creation of a number of independent States on the territory of the former Soviet Union 
would not increase the number of nuclear-weapon States. 
104. With regard to the fulfilment of NPT obligations, he deplored the fact that at the end 
of 1992 there had been 47 non-nuclear-weapon States party to the NPT which had not 
concluded the required safeguards agreements with the Agency within the prescribed period 
of 18 months after ratification or accession. 
105. His delegation, which believed that the safeguards system should undergo continuous 
evaluation and adjustment in the light of changing circumstances, commended the Director 
General for having sought advice in that connection from an expanded SAGSI, whose 
valuable recommendations should receive due consideration. 
106. His delegation was concerned about possible clandestine trading in nuclear materials. 
The Agency should investigate all indications of illicit transactions and do its utmost to 
prevent diversion. 
107. Norway, which was a strong supporter of reliable and effective safeguards, considered 
that the application of safeguards to declared facilities in non-nuclear-weapon States provided 
largely satisfactory assurance of non-diversion. The main safeguards problems at present 
were, on one hand, undeclared facilities and materials and, on the other, cost-effectiveness. 
His country would like to see Agency safeguards applied ultimately to all peaceful nuclear 
activities in all States, and it therefore favoured the gradual extension of safeguards in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 29 

nuclear-weapon States, although that would make the question of resources for safeguards 
more acute. 

108. The issue of undeclared nuclear facilities and materials had been highlighted by events 
in Iraq. The number of cases of undeclared nuclear facilities and materials was undoubtedly 
low, however, and a considerable improvement could be achieved through special 
inspections, through the universal reporting of imports and exports of nuclear material and 
specified equipment and non-nuclear material, and through the use of all the information 
available to the Agency. Environmental monitoring might also prove valuable if it was 
considered less intrusive than other safeguards methods. 
109. In the long run, however, cost-effectiveness might prove to be the greater problem 
as the increasing amounts of nuclear material under safeguards made it more and more 
difficult to maintain safeguards quality. In that connection, his delegation welcomed the New 
Partnership Approach agreed upon with EURATOM as a step in the right direction. 
110. In conclusion, he commended the Director General and the staff of the Secretariat for 
the results achieved in 1992 despite financial problems. 
111. Mr. EL-MADANI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), commending the Agency on its 
effectiveness in the face of new challenges, said that, in endeavouring to disseminate the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy for the benefit of mankind and to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection, it had adapted well to 
the changes which had taken place on the international scene. 
112. The Agency had been created in order to serve its Member States, most of which 
believed that its most important task was to promote technology transfer. That fact should 
be borne in mind in 1995 during the NPT Review and Extension Conference. 
113. With regard to the strengthening of the Agency's main activities, he expressed his 
delegation's support for activities relating to the technical, legal and financial aspects of the 
practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries and said that his country 
would like to participate in those activities. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 30 

114. Calling upon all Member States with the necessary resources to support the 
programmes being carried out within the framework of AFRA, he expressed the hope that 
support would be provided by the Arab Atomic Energy Agency. 
115. With regard to the environment and radiation protection, he said that more should be 
done to prevent a repetition of accidents like the one that had occurred at Chernobyl, which 
had thoroughly shaken the people living in the affected region and turned them completely 
against nuclear power. 
116. A particular problem in the nuclear safety area was that of nuclear waste, which 
constituted a potential worldwide environmental hazard. Nuclear waste management 
standards should be raised, and the sanctions for infringing them should be increased. 
Moreover, the Agency should be directly responsible for ensuring compliance with those 
standards, which should be obligatory. 
117. A major task of the Agency was to devise policies and procedures conducive to 
nuclear disarmament. His delegation was pleased with the efforts being made by the Agency 
in that connection, particularly its efforts directed towards the establishment of nuclearweapon-
free zones, and called upon those States which were creating obstacles to co-operate 
with the Agency. The Agency should pursue its efforts, for nuclear weapons had no raison 
d'etre in the present world situation. 
118. With the accession of further States, the NPT was coming close to being universal. 
A universal NPT would be a major factor in ridding the planet of nuclear weapons. At 
present, nothing could guarantee the use of nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful 
development better than the NPT, which should nevertheless be adapted in the light of 
scientific and technical progress with due consideration for the sovereign equality of States. 
119. Like many Member States, his country believed that States with significant nuclear 
activities should contribute more towards the costs of safeguards. 
120. Aware of the potential advantages of using nuclear power for seawater desalination, 
his delegation welcomed the Agency's activities in that area. His country intended to 
continue supporting those activities, providing experts and making financial contributions in 
collaboration with the other countries of North Africa and with Saudi Arabia. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 31 

121. Ms. KSENTTNI (Algeria) said that, given the profound changes taking place 
in the world, the Agency would have to intensify its efforts and use greater imagination in 
devising new ways of attaining its high objectives and in ensuring that its activities served 
the cause of international co-operation for peace and development. More than ever, it would 
have to demonstrate its ability to help in strengthening confidence among States and to 
promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy in the interests of the present generation and 
future ones and with due regard for the environment. 
122. The Agency's safeguards activities were widely appreciated but the credibility of the 
Agency also depended on how it went about promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Accordingly, the Agency would do well to pursue a harmonious balance between its 
regulatory and its promotional activities, of which technical assistance was the central 
element. 
123. With the support of Member States, the Agency had made significant efforts to 
strengthen the effectiveness and improve the efficiency of its safeguards. The results should 
be judged in the light of complementary action in other organizations and of the positive 
measures to be taken in order to strengthen confidence among States, such confidence 
depending ultimately on the development and implementation of a global, non-discriminatory 
approach to nuclear non-proliferation and on a nuclear disarmament policy requiring a 
complete cessation of nuclear tests, an appreciable reduction in nuclear arsenals and a 
universal commitment not to resort to the threat or use of nuclear weapons against nonnuclear-
weapon States. 
124. Negotiations currently in progress held out hope of the realization of conditions 
conducive to the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones. As far as the Middle East was 
concerned, the Agency had an important role to play with regard to Israel's nuclear capacity, 
and her delegation hoped that recent developments in. the region would make things easier 
for the Agency. Algeria had welcomed the signing in Washington D.C. of the Peace 
Agreement between the PLO and Israel, which would - it hoped - prove to be the first step 
towards a settlement of the Middle East conflict and towards the self-determination and 
independence of the Palestinian people. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 32 

125. In Africa, a United Nations/OAU expert group had reached a decisive stage in 
formulating a legal framework for a nuclear-weapon-free zone, which the Assembly of Heads 
of State and Government of the OAU had been calling for since 1964, when they had adopted 
the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa. The attainment of that goal, which had 
long been frustrated by the situation in Southern Africa, might be brought nearer by the 
current positive developments in South Africa and by its Government's policy of transparency 
in respect of its nuclear programme. Her country had welcomed the agreement reached in 
South Africa in the negotiations on the establishment of a Transitional Executive Council; 
that would - it hoped - help pave the way for the April 1994 elections and for the creation 
of a democratic, unified and non-racial South Africa. 
126. More and more demands were being made on the Agency, but its ability to respond 
was being undermined by financial difficulties. For several years now, the Agency's budget 
estimates had been based on zero real growth. Moreover, the non-payment of contributions 
by several Member States had forced the Agency to defer various programme activities or 
even make a substantial overall cut in financial plans. There was a danger that perennial 
financial constraints would plunge the Agency into a structural crisis, upset the delicate 
balance between its different activities and reduce its effectiveness. 
127. The heaviest burden fell on the technical assistance and co-operation programme, 
which had been seriously affected by the overall cut in financial plans and was suffering from 
a financing system which did not provide for assured, adequate and foreseeable resources. 
128. In the present difficult period, it was necessary to reaffirm the importance of 
maintaining a balance among the main activities of the Agency and to strengthen its 
promotional activities, with due regard for the needs of developing countries, which 
depended on Agency technical assistance and co-operation. 
129. Given the profound changes she had referred to earlier, the Agency should conduct 
a detailed study of the staffing situation in the Secretariat and of the composition of the Board 
and its main committees with a view to a consensus on ways of achieving broader 
representation of developing countries on the basis of more equitable geographical 
distribution. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 33 

130. The current discussions on the staffing of the Secretariat, on Article VI.A.2 of the 
Statute and on Article VI as a whole were taking place at a time when bold changes were 
being made in other international organizations. The Agency should not keep aloof from 
such developments. 
131. The excellent co-operation between Algeria and the Agency bore witness to Algeria's 
interest in all of the Agency's statutory activities and its belief in the universality of peace 
and security, in nuclear non-proliferation and in scientific and technological development with 
transparency in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. The appreciable results had been 
achieved through that co-operation in the health, the agricultural, the energy and other 
sectors. There were also prospects in the field of food irradiation. Algeria intended to call 
increasingly on the Agency's services in such fields as radiation protection, waste 
management and radioisotope production using research reactors. 
132. The experience gained by Algeria in those different fields would benefit the subregional 
and continental co-operation in which Algeria was intending to become involved. 
In the light of the success achieved in the Maghreb in combating the screw worm, Algeria 
intended to continue with efforts to eradicate the Mediterranean fruit fly in that region and 
seek other areas of common interest; seawater desalination might be one such area. 
133. At the continental level, her country was supporting AFRA, for which it would like 
to see more international assistance. AFRA's first successes, albeit modest, had been made 
possible by the momentum imparted by the Agency's technical and financial support, and the 
valuable contributions of various donor countries; also, mention should be made of the 
commitment and energy of the AFRA member countries in implementing the programme. 
While welcoming the work already done, Algeria hoped that the Agency would provide 
additional resources and that donor countries would respond positively to AFRA's financial 
needs. 
134. The Algerian delegation, which had excellent relations with the Secretariat as a whole, 
was particularly grateful to the Department of Technical Co-operation for its advice and 
support and to the Department of Safeguards for its co-operative attitude with regard to 
safeguards implementation. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 34 

135. A time of new hopes, challenges and risks should prompt everyone to reflect and, 
through constructive dialogue, seek ways in which the Agency could participate fully in the 
necessarily collective effort directed towards world peace, development for all and shared 
progress. Member States should prepare themselves for that long-term effort, so as to ensure 
that the present decade did not prove to be a decade of lost opportunities. 
136. Ms. NGUYEN THI HOI (Viet Nam), reviewing the Agency's activities in the 
context of the recent improvements in international relations, said that her country was in 
favour of all initiatives aimed at enhancing the efficiency and effectiveness of the technical 
co-operation programme and that the Director General and the Secretariat were to be 
commended for their efforts in that respect. However, the numerous occasions on which 
developing countries had had urgent technical co-operation requests denied owing to resource 
constraints were an indication that much still remained to be done. Her delegation therefore 
believed that during the next biennial technical co-operation cycle more should be done to 
maintain a balance between safeguards and promotional activities. 
137. As a party to the NPT and a firm proponent of nuclear non-proliferation, her country 
looked forward to the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa and the Middle 
East, and it was in favour of strengthening the Agency's safeguards, which should be applied 
in accordance with the provisions of the Statute and with full regard for national sovereignty. 
138. In Viet Nam, all activities involving applications of nuclear techniques were carried 
out within the framework of the five-year National Development Programme, which was well 
integrated with the Agency's regional technical assistance and co-operation activities - an 
arrangement which benefited Vietnamese research and development in support of nuclear 
science and technology. Awareness of the advantages offered by nuclear techniques had 
increased throughout the country, resulting in a growing demand from the industrial, 
agricultural, health and environmental protection sectors. 
139. Technical assistance received from the Agency had enabled the National Atomic 
Energy Commission (VINATOM) to start helping the industrial sector through the provision 
of guidance and training and through other support of efforts to introduce nuclear techniques 
such as NDT. Groundwater and sedimentation studies using tracer techniques had been 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 35 

carried out with the assistance of UNDP and the Agency, with promising results. In 
response to growing needs, a further industrial irradiation facility had been built; located in 
the south of the country, it complemented the facility located in Hanoi, which had been 
inaugurated in April in the presence of Agency representatives. 

140. Encouraged by the Agency, Viet Nam was in the initial stage of a comprehensive 
assessment of its energy potential, including the prospects for using nuclear power, and she 
hoped that the Agency would actively support it during the later stages. 
141. In response to the increased use of nuclear techniques at various institutions, great 
efforts were being made with Agency assistance to promote nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. There were plans to establish a national monitoring system for nuclear activities, 
and a radioactive waste management programme was being launched. Also, a Decree on 
Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection was in the process of being drafted. 
142. In conclusion, she thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the effective 
assistance which the Agency had provided to Viet Nam and wished them every success in 
their future endeavours to promote development and prosperity through the peaceful 
application of nuclear technology. 
Mr. Al-Athel (Saudi Arabia) resumed the Chair. 

143. Mr. DECLAN (Ireland), having associated himself with the statement made 
the previous day by the representative of Belgium on behalf of the European Community and 
its Member States, said that, as one of the original proponents of the NPT, Ireland favoured 
its indefinite and unconditional extension in 1995. Universal accession to the NPT and full 
compliance with its obligations would help to prevent major threats to international peace and 
security, and his country therefore welcomed the recent accession to the Treaty of Armenia, 
Azerbaijan, Belarus, Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania and Uzbekistan. He appealed to the 
countries remaining outside the NPT to accede to it, thereby making the NPT regime truly 
universal, and in particular he urged Ukraine and Kazakhstan to become parties to the NPT 
as non-nuclear-weapon States as soon as possible. 
144. Latin America was rapidly moving towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone, and there were encouraging developments in the same direction on the African 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 36 

continent. It was greatly to be hoped that similar developments would become possible 
elsewhere. With regard to the Middle East, Ireland was all too well aware that fears of 
nuclear proliferation had contributed greatly to the region's instability. It took heart from 
the positive steps taken in recent weeks in the peace process, which greatly enhanced the 
possibility of a nuclear-weapon-free zone being established and of full-scope safeguards being 
introduced throughout the region. With that prospect in view, he urged all parties to the 
NPT in the region to abide fully by their undertakings. 

145. The Agency remained in the forefront of the collective endeavours to stem the tide 
of nuclear proliferation, primarily through the effective application of the safeguards system. 
The Agency had learnt important lessons from the experience of uncovering Iraq's 
clandestine nuclear weapons programme, and that had led to a renewed political commitment 
to strengthen the non-proliferation regime. It was his delegation's hope that that commitment 
would be reflected in continuing improvements in the safeguards system. 
146. Ireland believed that the Agency had the right to carry out, when necessary and 
appropriate, special inspections in Member States with comprehensive safeguards agreements, 
and it accordingly supported the efforts of the Director General to implement the Agency's 
safeguards agreement with the DPRK. Continued non-compliance by the DPRK with its 
NPT obligations would be an entirely retrograde development, and Ireland therefore urged 
the DPRK to respect in full its safeguards obligations and to reaffirm its intention to respect 
its bilateral agreement with the Republic of Korea on the denuclearization of the Korean 
Peninsula. 
147. His country welcomed the report by the Director General on the Agency' s verification 
activities in South Africa. It was clear that the inspection team had undertaken a task of 
considerable scope and complexity. The results of the inspection activities were encouraging, 
and Ireland commended South Africa on the transparency of its non-proliferation policy. 
148. His delegation particularly welcomed the emerging debate on international plutonium 
storage; it was right that the Director General should again call attention to the issue in his 
statement to the General Conference. In his delegation's view, any new arrangement would 
have to take into account plutonium from all sources - civil and military. The international 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 37 

community was entitled to assurances that the implementation of START I and II would not 
pose any nuclear safety or nuclear proliferation risks. The best way of providing such 
assurances was through the active involvement of the Agency in the process of dismantling 
warheads and safeguarding the nuclear material. 

149. Nuclear safety was not simply a national matter, but a subject of legitimate 
international concern. It was not enough to say that nuclear safety was the prime 
responsibility of the operator; it was the duty of the State to ensure that the operator 
exercised that responsibility adequately. Also, it was important that the State undertake a 
commitment vis-a-vis the international community to enforce that responsibility and to ensure 
that any transboundary effects were minimized. 
150. In that context, Ireland welcomed the progress made by the Group of Experts 
preparing a draft nuclear safety convention. Early agreement on the convention was of vital 
importance, and he hoped that an agreed text would be finalized shortly. 
151. Ireland regretted, however, that the text would not embrace all nuclear fuel cycle 
activities involving risk and giving rise to public concern. It also regretted that it had not 
been possible to achieve a consensus on using the Agency's safety standards as the criteria 
underpinning the convention. Nevertheless, Ireland was encouraged by the emerging 
commitment to proceed with the preparation of a separate convention on the safety of nuclear 
waste management as soon as there was agreement within the Agency on the relevant safety 
fundamentals; it was also encouraged by the general agreement that the door must be left 
open to developing, in due course, appropriate instruments covering the safety of other parts 
of the nuclear fuel cycle. It was important that the General Conference, at the present 
session, affirm the political commitment to move forward on those lines. 
152. Ireland appreciated the important role being played by the Agency in assessing the 
safety of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and countries of the former Soviet Union 
and its promptness in responding to nuclear events there. The Agency should continue 
assisting the G-24 in that area. 
153. Commending the IAEA-UNDP initiative aimed at strengthening radiation protection 
and nuclear safety infrastructures in countries of the former Soviet Union, he said that the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 38 

sub-standard state of many of the nuclear power reactors in the countries in question had 
been known for some time. He hoped that the offers of technical and financial assistance 
made by a number of Member States would be accepted and the proposals put forward by 
those countries implemented without delay. 

154. For many years it had been evident that the existing nuclear civil liability regime was 
seriously deficient. For its part, Ireland had been urging that priority be given to the 
development of an enhanced international regime on liability for nuclear damage with 
adequate compensation for victims and that the Agency assume a major role in that 
connection. Four years had elapsed since the Board of Governors had established the 
Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, but in that period the problem had, 
if anything, become more pressing. In the past two years alone, a series of incidents at 
Soviet-designed nuclear reactors and the discovery of serious safety problems at others had 
given rise to new fears of a major disaster. That underlined the pressing need to bring into 
being an effective and generally acceptable liability regime; without one, international efforts 
to improve nuclear safety would lack a substantial factor necessary for the public acceptance 
of nuclear energy. 
155. The progress achieved so far in the Standing Committee was to be welcomed, but the 
Committee needed to intensify its efforts and bring the work to a conclusion quickly. 
Ireland's position was that the modernization and strengthening of the liability regime should 
include - on one hand - a revision of the Vienna Convention, with the incorporation of some 
elements of State liability, and - on the other - the introduction of supplementary funding to 
complement the liability of operators. Ireland believed that supplementary funding should 
be an integral part of the new liability regime. It looked forward to the holding in 1994 of 
a single diplomatic conference covering both a liability convention and a supplementary 
funding convention. 
156. Lastly, Ireland wished to put on record once again its concern regarding the 
reprocessing of nuclear fuel. The matter was highly relevant because of the imminent 
conclusion by the United Kingdom Government of a consultation procedure prior to the 
taking of a decision on the licensing of the Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant (THORP) at 
Sellafield. Ireland's concern about the resulting expansion of nuclear fuel reprocessing was 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 39 

based on two main considerations: first, the substantial and increasing discharges of 
radioactive waste into the environment, which would lead to increased radiation exposure of 
the Irish population; and secondly, the risk of much more severe contamination due to an 
accident at the plant or occurring in the course of the transportation of nuclear material to 
or from it. 

157. In a wider context, reprocessing brought with it serious safety and safeguards hazards 
due to growing stockpiles of and a growing trade in plutonium and other highly active 
materials for which there was no immediate use. The justification for reprocessing derived 
from ideas of an earlier decade when nuclear power had been seen as having a prosperous 
and expanding future. At that time, reprocessing had been considered a key component of 
the nuclear fuel cycle, necessary in order to conserve uranium resources and provide 
plutonium for fast breeder reactors. Today, the arguments for reprocessing were far from 
persuasive: the expected expansion of nuclear power had not occurred and uranium supplies 
had become plentiful; fast breeder reactors were not seen as having any immediate 
commercial future; and the plutonium and uranium recovered from spent fuel were no longer 
required on grounds of economy or security of supply. 
158. Accordingly, Ireland believed that the entire question of reprocessing, together with 
the related issues of transportation, discharges and plutonium storage and management, 
should be examined more closely by both the Agency and its Member States. 
159. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said that his delegation shared the concern voiced 
by the Director General over the Agency's precarious financial situation and expressed the 
hope that arrears of Regular Budget contributions would soon be fully paid. It was 
particularly anxious that the deferred programmes - having a total value of $16.2 million should 
be implemented. 
160. In 1992, Member States had affirmed the need to achieve an adequate balance 
between the Agency's safeguards and non-safeguards activities. The fact remained, however, 
that the two groups of activities, while equal in legal status, were not equal in the sense that 
they both enjoyed assured and predictable financing. His delegation would like to see the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 40 

imbalance gradually rectified, although it appreciated the complementary relationship between 
the two groups of activities. 

161. His delegation welcomed the Board's decision to hold a wide-ranging policy review 
of technical co-operation activities in 1994. It looked forward to a thorough discussion on 
the identification of more specific criteria for assessing project proposals and project 
implementation. 
162. Although the Philippines had decided to consider only non-nuclear options for the 
possible operation of the mothballed Bataan nuclear power plant, it recognized the need to 
continue studying the feasibility of nuclear power for generating electricity. Accordingly, 
President Ramos had recently directed the agencies concerned to produce a comprehensive 
nuclear power programme. 
163. The Philippines, which appreciated the promptness with which the Agency had in the 
past assisted his Government by sending experts to help deal with some of the issues involved 
in such a programme, looked forward to availing itself of the support extended by the 
Agency to developing countries in the formulation of an integrated approach to energy, 
electricity and nuclear power programme planning. 
164. Regarding non-power applications of nuclear energy, the Philippines had been 
engaged in projects in agriculture, medicine, industry and research. The idea of model 
technical assistance projects was an innovation which should enable countries to focus 
resources on projects likely to have a national impact. 
165. The Philippines recognized the need for public acceptance of and support for peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and, with the Agency's support, was preparing to hold a seminar on 
the subject in Manila in 1994. 
166. In March, the Philippines had had the privilege of hosting the fifteenth meeting of the 
working group of RCA representatives, at which the 47 participants from 13 RCA member 
States had reconfirmed the strength and maturity of the technical co-operation network 
fostered by the RCA. His country had noted with appreciation the approval for a 
UNDP/RCA/IAEA regional industrial and environmental project which, it hoped, would 
further enhance the contribution of the regional approach, particularly in the important area 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 41 

of environmental protection. Also, it appreciated the valuable technical co-operation projects 
executed through and with the Agency. 

167. Despite growing and increasingly complex challenges, the Agency continued to play 
a vital role in the promotion of peace and development. As the United Nations Secretary-
General had pointed out in his message to the General Conference, the time had come for 
the integration of disarmament and non-proliferation issues into the broader international 
agenda for peace, development and security. The Agency had much to contribute to such 
efforts, on one hand by vigorously pursuing its mandate with regard to safeguards, nuclear 
safety and spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste management, and on the other by 
promoting nuclear techniques for peaceful, developmental uses. 
168. Referring to the Agency's role as guardian of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, 
he said it was incumbent upon all Member States to uphold the integrity and credibility of 
the international safeguards system and to ensure that no derogations from States' obligations 
under the NPT and the related safeguards agreements with the Agency were allowed to take 
place. It was mainly for that reason that the Philippines fully shared the universal concern 
over the lack of full compliance by the DPRK with its obligations under its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. The Conference must continue to be vigilant and determined 
in insisting upon adherence to and compliance with the NPT and on the fulfilment of 
safeguards obligations. 
169. His country welcomed the progress made in the implementation of the NPT 
safeguards agreement between the Agency and South Africa; the conclusion of the 
quadripartite safeguards agreement between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency and 
of other arrangements - bilateral, subregional and regional - relating to nuclear nonproliferation; 
the steps taken by the countries concerned towards the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East; and the efforts of the African States towards 
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. 
170. In his country's part of the world, the members of ASEAN had long been committed 
to the creation of a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality which would include a south-east 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 42 

Asian nuclear-weapon-free zone. In July, the ASEAN foreign ministers had affirmed their 
desire for an indefinite extension of the NPT beyond 1995. 

171. The Director General had given a glimpse of the wide-ranging tasks which the Agency 
would face if and when agreement was reached on an international regime for the 
management of plutonium and highly enriched uranium, on a verified cut-off of the 
production of fissionable material for use in weapons or explosives, and on a complete ban 
on testing of nuclear weapons and other explosives. His Government was confident that the 
Agency would be able to carry out those tasks. 
172. The approval of further countries for membership of the Agency, which he welcomed, 
highlighted the important issue of achieving greater democracy within the Agency and the 
Secretariat. In that connection, he commended the Director General on his efforts to recruit 
staff on as wide a geographical basis as possible and to increase the number of women 
serving in higher grades. 
173. The Philippines believed that the issue of more equitable representation in, and 
therefore democratization of, the Board should be given urgent attention. In that connection, 
it considered that a comprehensive revision of Article VI of the Statute would be better than 
partial, ad hoc amendments to it and that Article VI as a whole should be examined with a 
view to greater transparency and consistency. 
174. Mr. SANGIAMBUT (Thailand) said that in the past year there had been 
satisfactory progress in various areas of Agency activity and commended the Agency 
particularly on its technical assistance programme, from which Thailand had benefited 
greatly. The nuclear techniques mastered through co-operation with the Agency were playing 
an important role in his country's development. 
175. On the subject of food irradiation, he said that Thailand had successfully irradiated 
a range of products but that many industrialized countries were still banning the import of 
irradiated foodstuffs even though they were - and could be proven to be - safe for human 
consumption. He appealed to those countries to lift what was in effect a trade barrier. 
176. Thailand continued to attach importance to strengthening of the Agency's safeguards 
system. While noting with satisfaction what had been done recently in that regard, he said 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 43 

that there was still some way to go; an incentive-based approach might prove successful. 
Developing countries which accepted comprehensive, transparent safeguards should be 
allowed to benefit from intensified technical co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
technology. 

Mr. Sangiambut (Thailand) took the Chair. 

177. Mr. SHEARAR (South Africa) said that South Africa had provided ample 
proof of its commitment to the aims of the Agency, even at times when relations had been 
rather difficult, and that in welcoming the approval of further countries for Agency 
membership he wished to emphasize his Government's belief that all countries of the world, 
regardless of whether they had nuclear programmes, should contribute to the attainment of 
those aims by becoming Agency Member States. 
178. Turning to South Africa's decision to terminate its nuclear deterrent programme and 
accede to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State in response to the dissipation of the 
perceived threat to its security, he said that his country was deeply committed to the ideals 
of the NPT, to the principles of disarmament and the non-proliferation of all weapons of 
mass destruction, and to the process of making Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
179. His Government, which had taken careful note of the Director General's stated 
intention to strengthen safeguards implementation, regarded the strengthening of safeguards 
as an important step towards establishing a climate of international confidence and ensuring 
transparency in the policies of Member States. For its part, South Africa had set a precedent 
and exceeded its safeguards obligations by inviting the Agency to examine its past facilities 
and records and to verify the abandonment of its limited deterrent programme. The Agency 
had responded positively, despite the considerable strain placed on its resources by 
verification commitments in other parts of the world, notably Iraq and the DPRK. 
180. Following the South African State President's announcement in March concerning the 
existence and subsequent abandonment of a South African nuclear weapons capability, the 
Agency had begun to assess the status of that programme. The report contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1075 substantiated the State President's announcement. The concerns of some 
Member States regarding alleged discrepancies in respect of the amounts of HEU declared 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 44 

in South Africa's initial inventory report had been addressed. Similarly, an apparent 
discrepancy in the uranium-235 balance was now being clarified within the framework of 
the Agency's normal verification activities. The events of the preceding six months, which 
had shown how full use of the Agency's expertise and full transparency on the part of the 
State could bring mutual advantages, constituted a practical demonstration of a procedure 
which other countries might do well to consider, both in their own interests and in the 
interests of the nuclear community at large. 

181. The Agency was to be congratulated on the progress achieved in the preparation of 
a nuclear safety convention. Having studied the arguments in favour of both a broader and 
a more limited convention, his delegation could go along with a more limited one provided 
the ultimate objective - wider application of the basic principles embodied in the draft 
convention - was kept firmly in view. 
182. With regard to the NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995, he said that 
South Africa favoured indefinite extension of the NPT, but in reaching a final decision it 
would consult its fellow African States and take into account the commitment of all NPT 
parties to the reduction of nuclear arsenals and the ultimate elimination of nuclear weapons 
and to meeting their obligation to facilitate and promote the transfer of nuclear technology 
for peaceful purposes. 
183. Since acceding to the NPT in 1991, South Africa had taken a number of steps to help 
promote the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, playing an active technical 
role in the working groups engaged in preparations for the establishment of the Organization 
for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons and in the expert meetings concerning verification 
under the Biological Weapons Convention, becoming a participating observer at the 
Conference on Disarmament and joining the Zangger Committee. It was engaged in 
discussions concerning membership of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and also of the Missile 
Technology Control Regime. In addition, a combined South African/United States team was 
to investigate the technical and economic feasibility of converting South Africa's SAFARI-1 
research reactor from HEU to LEU fuel. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 45 

184. Comprehensive legislation had been passed with a view to reinforcing nonproliferation, 
including a provision that all exports of relevant nuclear equipment and material 
should be for peaceful purposes only and that, when the recipient country was a non-nuclearweapon 
State, comprehensive international safeguards should be applied at all times. 
185. South Africa, which was deriving benefit from its participation in AFRA activities, 
had proposed four AFRA training projects in whose funding it was prepared to share. 
Naturally, its involvement in those projects would affect the amount which South Africa 
could contribute to the TACF. 
186. South Africa had also been actively involved in the drafting of a treaty on a nuclearweapon-
free zone in Africa - a legal instrument which would, it hoped, bring a nuclearweapon-
free southern hemisphere closer. Success in concluding the treaty would be a 
demonstration of how sovereign States could transcend their suspicion of one another in the 
interests of joint security. The African experience might well serve as an example to other 
regions, such as the Middle East and the Asian sub-continent. 
187. It was a matter for serious concern that two Member States, Iraq and the DPRK, had 
not fulfilled their obligations under the NPT and their safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. He called on Iraq to comply with the Security Council resolutions concerning it and 
on the DPRK to co-operate with the Agency's Secretariat and, in the interests of peace and 
security on the Korean Peninsula and in the surrounding region, to resolve its differences and 
fulfil its safeguards obligations. 
188. Since South Africa's relations with the Agency had been largely determined by its 
domestic political situation, he felt that it was not inappropriate to remind the Conference that 
legislation had recently been adopted providing for the establishment of a multi-party 
Transitional Executive Council to oversee the run-up to elections by universal suffrage, 
scheduled by common agreement for April 1994. With the establishment of the Council, the 
economic sanctions still being maintained against his country should be removed. In 
particular, the mandatory embargo imposed by the Security Council in 1977 in 
resolution 418, including its nuclear-related provisions, should be lifted, for the findings 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 46 

which had given rise to that resolution had long since lost whatever reality they had once 
possessed. 

189. South Africa had done all that could be expected of it - or even more - to normalize 
its participation in the work of the Agency, and he trusted that the General Conference would 
acknowledge that fact in its discussion of the item "The denuclearization of Africa". 
190. Mr. SHTEYNBERG (Ukraine) said that, after two years of independence, his 
country was still having to cope with many political and economic problems in the course 
of consolidating its independent statehood. 
191. One problem - that of the nuclear weapons which Ukraine had inherited from the 
former Soviet Union - was the focus of constant international attention. Unfortunately, 
however, the position of Ukraine regarding the nuclear weapons on its territory was all too 
often distorted. The position of Ukraine, and of the other Republics of the former Soviet 
Union on whose territories parts of the nuclear potential of the former Superpower were 
located, was quite unique. Existing international legal instruments, including the NPT, were 
silent about the status of successor States which, on the basis of national legal instruments, 
had inherited nuclear weapons. For the first time in the history of the world a nuclear Power 
had disintegrated, and no single successor State could be considered the sole heir; by virtue 
of the principle that successor States were equal, all were legally entitled to claim nuclear 
status. 
192. Each successor State had independently adopted its own stance on the nuclear weapons 
issue in the light of its national interests and its sense of responsibility with regard to the 
future of its own people and of mankind in general. 
193. From the legal point of view, Ukraine's right to possess nuclear weapons stemmed 
from laws, passed before the disintegration of the Soviet Union, which were in conformity 
with international legal standards, in particular the 1983 Vienna Convention on Succession 
of States in respect of State Property, Archives and Debts. 
194. In accordance with the 1990 Declaration of Sovereignty of Ukraine and the 1991 
Supreme Soviet Declaration of Ukraine's non-nuclear status, his country was determined not 
to accept, not to produce and not to acquire nuclear weapons. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 47 

195. Ukraine was systematically taking steps directed towards the achievement of nonnuclear-
weapon status. The removal of tactical nuclear weapons from Ukraine's territory had 
been completed, and the removal from combat readiness and the dismantling of strategic 
nuclear weapons had begun. The strategic nuclear forces deployed in Ukraine had been 
placed under joint CIS operational command, Ukraine having only administrative 
responsibility, which in no way enabled it to use the nuclear weapons in question or to gain 
access to military nuclear technology. 
196. As Ukraine still possessed nuclear weapons components, it could not automatically 
acquire non-nuclear-weapon status. Until the weapons in question had been completely 
destroyed, it was difficult to say whether, in law, Ukraine was a nuclear-weapon State in the 
classical sense or a non-nuclear-weapon State. 
197. His country valued the Agency' s safeguards activities, which were acquiring particular 
significance at a time when nuclear weapons were being destroyed, and welcomed the 
Agency's efforts to strengthen the comprehensive safeguards regime. Ukraine was very 
conscious of the fact that the world community was looking forward to Ukraine's peaceful 
nuclear activities being placed under comprehensive safeguards soon - something it was itself 
endeavouring to achieve. As previously indicated, however, there were still problems to be 
resolved before Ukraine could accede to the NPT. Nevertheless, his country was taking 
practical steps to minimize the lead-time until the start of safeguards application. At the 
previous session of the General Conference, his Government had declared its willingness to 
submit Ukraine's nuclear power plants and its research reactor to Agency safeguards, and 
since then there had been technical visits by Agency safeguards inspectors to all those 
facilities. 
198. A few days previously, regulations for the establishment of an SSAC had been 
registered with the Ukrainian Ministry of Justice. His country was grateful for the invaluable 
help given by Sweden in that respect. 
199. Work was in progress to establish a nuclear export/import control system. An Export 
Control Committee had been created with the task, inter alia, of monitoring compliance with 
international norms regarding the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and their 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 48 

delivery systems. A further important step had been ratification of the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material by Ukraine's Supreme Soviet. Thus, his country 
was - in both word and deed - laying the foundations for full participation in the nonproliferation 
regime. 

200. In view of the progress already made in that direction, his delegation had been 
authorized by the Ukrainian Government to announce that Ukraine was ready to place its 
nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards without waiting for the creation of all the 
conditions necessary for accession to the NPT, and it proposed that appropriate discussions 
be initiated. 
201. Nuclear power played a major role in Ukraine's economy. In 1992 nuclear power 
plants had accounted for approximately 30% of Ukraine's total electricity production. 
Thermal power plants were occasionally being put on standby because of the increasingly 
acute fossil fuel situation, so that the contribution of nuclear power was rising steadily reaching 
34.5% in the first half of the current year. 
202. The Ukrainian Supreme Soviet had decided that the Chernobyl nuclear power station 
should be shut down at the end of 1993, and at present the station - which was operating 
normally - was being prepared for shutdown. In view of the critical energy situation in the 
country, however, his Government was considering the possibility of keeping the station in 
service until replacement plants, with WWER-lOOOs, were ready for operation. The 
construction of six such units in Ukraine had been "frozen" until 1995 by order of the 
Supreme Soviet. 
203. Nuclear power was at present going through difficult times in Ukraine. The economic 
crisis was affecting the production of equipment and material essential for nuclear power 
plant safety and reliability. Matters were being made worse by the shortcomings of the 
country's nuclear-related legislation and standards and by a shortage of qualified R&D, 
design and other personnel. Spent fuel management was becoming a very urgent problem, 
which his country was trying to solve through approaches so far not attempted there. 
204. The most important task facing his country was - undoubtedly - ensuring a high level 
of nuclear safety. In that connection, the attitude of the world community had shifted 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 49 

perceptibly over the past year: firstly, downright rejection of Soviet technology had been 
replaced by a desire to better understand its advantages and shortcomings; secondly, it had 
been realized that the qualifications of former Soviet nuclear experts were by no means 
inferior to those of their counterparts in other countries, but that there had been - and still 
was - a "safety culture" gap; thirdly, it had been realized that, for economic reasons, the 

early shutdown of outdated nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and in countries of the 
former Soviet Union would not be possible. As a result, the safety of Ukraine's nuclear 
power plants was now being analysed and improved in a climate of practical co-operation 
rather than of confrontation. The Agency was playing an important role in that process 
through regional technical co-operation projects and extrabudgetary projects in which Ukraine 
was very actively involved. His country was grateful to the United States of America, 
Germany and France for the support which it had received from them, and it was pleased at 
the way in which co-operation with the European Community, OECD and EBRD was 
developing. Although it would still take some time to resolve all the problems involved in 
establishing a nuclear regulatory regime that was in accordance with Agency 
recommendations and achieving an acceptable level of nuclear safety, he was optimistic about 
the ultimate outcome. 

205. He commended the Agency on its efforts to strengthen international co-operation in 
nuclear safety and radiation protection and mentioned in that connection that Ukraine had 
concluded nuclear co-operation agreements with Russia, Germany, Poland and a number of 
other countries. 
206. Ukraine welcomed the progress made in drafting a nuclear safety convention and in 
the preparation of new Basic Safety Standards - two tasks which would, he hoped, be 
completed in 1994. Also, it was pleased with the work being done to establish a more 
effective nuclear liability regime, to which it was hoping to accede, and the considerable 
progress already made in formulating standards for radioactive waste management. There 
was a need for international consensus on an acceptable level of safety in the case of 
operating nuclear power plants built to earlier standards and for nuclear power plant safety 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 50 

principles which would serve as the basis for nuclear power development in the coming 
century. His delegation was convinced that the line being followed by the Agency would 
result in very high levels of safety and help to dispel fears about nuclear power. 

207. For the Ukrainian population, nuclear safety and radiation protection were not 
something abstract, but a practical aspect of everyday life. Ukraine was still feeling the 
consequences of the Chernobyl tragedy. His Government was doing a great deal to mitigate 
the consequences of the accident despite the difficult political and economic situation, and 
he was grateful to the world community for its understanding and support. 
208. Scientists and other experts from many countries had participated in an international 
competition for the design of a long-term replacement of the "Sarcophagus" containing the 
former Unit No. 4 of the Chernobyl nuclear power station, and preparations were under way 
for the next stages of the exercise. In conjunction with NEA, Ukraine was planning to hold, 
early in 1994, a seminar on the present safety status of Unit No. 4, the safety studies 
currently being carried out there and the safety measures which still needed to be taken. 
209. Expressing his delegation's support for the Agency's 1994 budget, he said that, 
because of an extraordinary economic situation, Ukraine had not been able to completely pay 
off its arrears of Regular Budget contributions. On the other hand, it had managed to reduce 
its debt level substantially in the course of the current year. On 16 September Ukraine had 
made a payment of $500 000 towards the Regular Budget, and his Government was taking 
steps with a view to paying off the remainder of its accumulated arrears as soon as possible. 
210. However, paradoxical as it might seem, at a time when his country was on the 
economic brink, a decision was about to be taken in the United Nations, and hence in the 
Agency, regarding an increase by a factor of 1.64 in Ukraine's rate of assessment. His 
country could not accept such a decision, which was nonsensical. The Ukrainian delegation 
to the United Nations General Assembly was pursuing the matter, but meanwhile he wished 
to emphasize that a decision to increase Ukraine's assessment rate to 1.996% could only 
undermine his country's participation in Agency activities. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.358 
page 51 

211. Ukraine appreciated and supported the Agency's varied activities directed towards 
strengthening international co-operation in the peaceful uses of atomic energy and would help 
in every way possible to resolve the extremely important problems facing the Agency. 
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
22 November 1993 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND FIFTY-NINTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 30 September 1993, at 10.30 a.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 
Later: Mr. WALKER (Canada) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

8 General debate and annual report for 1992 (continued) 1 - 153 

Statements by the delegates of the following States 
and organization: 

Qatar 1 -8 
Kuwait 9 - 18 
Romania 19-39 
Croatia 40-46 
Nicaragua 47-55 
Colombia 56-72 
Belarus 73-85 
Slovak Republic 86-98 
Zimbabwe 99 - 109 
Jordan 110- 119 
Morocco 120 - 131 
Commission of the European Communities 132 - 153 

Announcement concerning a new member of the Agency 154 

9

 Election of members to the Board of Governors 155 - 177 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-03811 (IV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 2 

Abbreviations used in this record 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASSET 
Basic Safety 
Standards 
CEC 
CIS 
CWC 

DPRK 
EBRD 
ECU 

EIB 

EURATOM 
FAO 
G-24 
INES 
ITER 
NEA 
NPT 
OSART 
RAPAT 
RCA 

START 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNDP 
WAMAP 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 

Basic Safety Standards for Radiation Protection 
Commission of the European Communities 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Chemical Weapons Convention (Convention on the Prohibition of the 
Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons 
and on Their Destruction) 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
European currency unit 
European Investment Bank 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Group of Twenty-Four 
International Nuclear Event Scale 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
United Nations Development Programme 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (continued) 

1. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said that his country was convinced of the importance of 
the non-proliferation regime and the need to ensure universal accession to the NPT, 
especially among the States of the Middle East. All Member States should support the 
Director General's efforts to intensify consultations with the States of that region, and 
particularly the States with nuclear activities, with a view to achieving the application of 
Agency safeguards to all nuclear facilities there. A nuclear-weapon-free Middle East was 
an important prerequisite for building confidence in the region, finding a just and equitable 
solution to regional problems, and consolidating international peace and security. 
2. The difficult financial position of the Agency was causing great concern, and could 
lead to a decrease in technical co-operation. His delegation hoped the main donor States 
would meet their commitments in full. 
3. The Arab States in the Middle East were receiving a rather modest fraction of the 
Agency's technical assistance resources despite their increasing needs. More resources 
should be made available, and the co-operation among the Arab States in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy should be strengthened. 
4. Qatar supported the Agency's efforts relating to nuclear safety, but it was clear that 
a great deal of work remained to be done in order to finalize a convention on nuclear safety. 
5. He welcomed the progress being made in the field of nuclear safety and also the 
Agency's training programmes in that field as described in some of the documents before the 
Conference. 
6. The question of nuclear safety was closely linked to that of nuclear waste management 
and disposal. A number of States with major nuclear activities were attempting to get rid 
of their nuclear wastes by exporting them to developing countries or dumping them at sea, 
where the wastes were becoming a danger to human health and the environment. He 
commended the co-operation taking place in that connection between the Agency, certain 
other international organizations and a number of Member States. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 4 

7. The Agency could play a major role in enabling developing countries to benefit more 
from the utilization of nuclear energy - by helping, for example, to find suitable underground 
sites for radioactive waste disposal and to set up low-cost nuclear desalination programmes. 
8. The Agency required the support of all Member States, acting in a spirit of 
international understanding and mutual trust, in order to achieve the noble objectives for 
which it was established and to help create a world where peace and justice prevailed. Qatar 
reiterated its support for the Agency's efforts and wished it every success in its future work. 
9. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said that the objectives set out in the Agency's 
Statute, particularly the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, were noble ones 
which deserved all possible support. The Agency had proved its worth and justified the 
belief that a safer and more stable world could be created. 
10. In the present difficult circumstances, it was important that all Member States, and 
particularly the major contributors, should try to meet their financial commitments to the 
Agency, which needed their support if it was to achieve its objectives. 
11. Water availability was a fundamental problem whose solution could make a significant 
contribution to international peace and security. Kuwait relied heavily on the desalination 
of seawater using fossil fuels and was one of the most advanced countries in that field. It 
therefore supported all efforts to develop more effective technologies - including nuclear 
technologies - for seawater desalination, and he hoped that the Agency would step up its 
activities in that area. 
12. He welcomed the accession of South Africa to the NPT and its commitment to 
destroying its nuclear weapons. That would help transform Africa into a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. 
13. The Agency's safeguards system was of vital importance for peace and security in the 
world, and especially in the Middle East. In the new political climate, every effort should 
be made to turn that region into a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass 
destruction. Kuwait, which was a party to the NPT and the Chemical Weapons Convention 
(CWC), hoped that all States of the Middle East would place their nuclear facilities under 
Agency safeguards. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 5 

14. Iraq and the DPRK should honour their commitments arising from safeguards 
agreements with the Agency. Also, Iraq should reveal the names of the suppliers who had 
provided equipment and materials for its nuclear weapons programme. In addition, it should 
co-operate with the Agency in the implementation of the plans for the long-term monitoring 
of all nuclear facilities in Iraq. 
15. At the beginning of September, the Ministerial Council of the Co-operation Council 
for the Arab States of the Gulf had urged the international community to continue putting 
pressure on the Iraqi regime in order to compel it to fulfil all its obligations under the terms 
of the Gulf War ceasefire and pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
16. On 20 September 1993, the Security Council had decided to continue with sanctions 
against the Iraqi regime, which was refusing to honour its commitments vis-a-vis the Agency 
and other international organizations, refusing to recognize the rights of Kuwait, and refusing 
to accept the resolutions adopted on the question of Iraq's border with Kuwait. 
17. Iraq was still holding 627 Kuwaiti and third-country nationals, and it had not cooperated 
properly with the United Nations regarding the return of property and the payment 
of compensation to Kuwait. Also, it had not complied with Security Council resolutions 706 
and 712, which would permit Iraqi oil to be sold and the proceeds to be used in feeding the 
Iraqi population and paying compensation. 
18. In conclusion, he commended the Agency's staff and the Director General for their 
efforts during the past year and wished the General Conference a successful session. 
19. MR. BALANESCU (Romania) said that the Agency had, ever since its 
creation, played a crucial role in promoting peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in preventing 
nuclear weapons proliferation. It was successfully carrying out a range of increasingly 
complex tasks, and the events of the past two years had demonstrated that its link with the 
United Nations Security Council was an important factor in helping it to fulfil its 
responsibilities. 
20. The picture presented in the annual report for 1992 was once again a positive one: 
despite unprecedented difficulties, the Agency had maintained a high level of quality in its 
activities. The Director General and the Secretariat were to be commended for their efforts 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 6 

to overcome financial difficulties and for their success in meeting ever-increasing obligations 
in the safeguards area, providing technical assistance, improving nuclear safety, stimulating 
research and development, and promoting technology transfer. 

21. Romania had continued to carry out substantial research and development work in 
areas such as nuclear physics, reactor physics, radiation biology and the utilization of 
isotopes and radiation in agriculture, medicine, industry and hydrology. High priority was 
being given to the country's nuclear power programme, for which Romania needed the help 
of foreign specialists with advanced technical skills. International co-operation, including cooperation 
within the framework of the Agency, was important in that connection. 
22. His Government considered that the nuclear power option offered a number of 
advantages: it made for greater energy diversity and hence for a greater assurance of energy 
supplies; it allowed better use to be made of research and development facilities and 
industrial infrastructures; and it helped to reduce environmental pollution. Romania's first 
nuclear power plant, which was to go into service at the end of the following year, would 
be environmentally very benign and have a high level of safety. 
23. Activities to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy were being pursued in the 
context of the Government's free-market economy policy. Restructuring was taking place 
with a view to greater efficiency and effectiveness, and foreign credits were being sought especially 
for the nuclear power sector. 
24. The nuclear sector in Romania was still controlled by the State, which was responsible 
for regulating it. With the help of the Agency and the advice of experts from countries 
advanced in the nuclear field, Romania was establishing a regulatory infrastructure for 
nuclear safety and radiation protection - a task which, he hoped, would be completed soon. 
His country was extremely grateful for the help which it had received from the Agency. 
25. With regard to the Agency's budget for 1994, his Government realized that, because 
it was a zero-real-growth budget, some priority needs of Member States had not been 
accommodated. All the same, in his delegation's view, the balance achieved after extensive 
consultations represented an appropriate response to resolutions GC(XXXVI)/RES/587 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 7 

and 596, significant technical adjustments having been made by the Secretariat in order to 
ensure that additional resources would be available for priority programmes. 

26. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities continued to be 
appreciated, although - owing to a shortage of funds - not all technically feasible projects 
could be implemented. He was encouraged by the fact that contributions by major donors 
to the TACF had increased during the past year, and he hoped that there would be further 
increases in the future. At the same time, however, the value of that part of the technical 
co-operation programme which was financed from non-convertible currencies had declined, 
as had the amount of extrabudgetary funds - including funds from UNDP - being made 
available to the Agency for technical co-operation activities. He urged Member States to 
increase their contributions to the TACF and provide more support for footnote-a/ projects. 
27. Participation in the Agency's technical co-operation programme, which was a 
powerful tool for the transfer of nuclear know-how, had helped his country to strengthen its 
nuclear power and nuclear safety capabilities and to master a wide range of nuclear 
applications in vital sectors such as industry, agriculture, medicine, environmental protection 
and hydrology. His government was grateful for the contribution made by the Agency and 
certain of its Member States to the development of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
technology in Romania and had decided, despite his country's current economic difficulties, 
to contribute to the TACF Romania's full share of the target for 1994 - one half in United 
States dollars and the other half in national currency. 
28. Romania, which supported measures designed to strengthen the non-proliferation 
regime, believed that the large number of States which had acceded to the NPT was evidence 
of the widespread acceptance of the principles of non-proliferation, in whose implementation 
the Agency was playing such an important part. 
29. The response of the Agency to challenges which had confronted it during recent 
months in the field of safeguards reconfirmed its capacity for strong action. In particular, 
his delegation greatly appreciated the way in which the Agency had fulfilled the mandate 
entrusted to it by the Security Council with regard to Iraq. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 8 

30. The decisive and constructive attitude of the Secretariat in implementating the NPT 
safeguards agreement concluded with the DPRK and the measures adopted by the Board in 
that connection had enhanced the credibility of safeguards and the prestige of the Agency. 
He hoped that a resumption of the dialogue between the Agency and the DPRK would 
ultimately lead to resolution of the outstanding problems. 
31. His country, which in the Board of Governors had fully endorsed the initiation of 
various measures to remedy inadequacies identified in the safeguards system, welcomed the 
recommendations of SAGSI relating to measures for making the system more efficient and 
more effective. 
32. Over the past two years, significant progress had been made towards the 
universalization of the NPT. That was particularly important as the NPT Review and 
Extension Conference was due to be held in only two years' time - in 1995. His 
Government, which regarded the NPT as a crucial element of the international security 
regime, favoured its extension for an indefinite period. 
33. In line with its policy on non-proliferation, his Government would comply with the 
latest guidelines of the Nuclear Suppliers Group regarding the export, subject to full-scope 
safeguards, of nuclear-related dual-use items, and he hoped that all States exporting such 
items would do the same. In that connection, it had endorsed the Group's "Guidelines for 
Nuclear Transfers" (see document INFCIRC/254/Rev.1/Part 1/Mod.1) and had introduced 
national regulations governing the export and import of nuclear-related items. 
34. Commending the Agency for the way in which it had been implementing the 
safeguards agreement concluded with South Africa in 1991, he said that Romania had 
welcomed South Africa's decision to dismantle its nuclear weapons programme before the 
agreement's entry into force. 
35. After the nuclear accident at Chernobyl, the Agency had embarked on a wide range 
of important activities in the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection, demonstrating 
its considerable capabilities in that field also. At present it was involved in work on 
preparing a nuclear safety convention which would - he was sure - help to raise the general 

GC(XXXVII)/ OR.359 
page 9 

level of nuclear safety throughout the world and to promote a unified international approach 
to all aspects of the subject. 

36. Romania attached great importance to nuclear safety and radiation protection, and it 
greatly appreciated the support which it had received from the Agency in that field and which 
had helped it in developing a regulatory regime based on internationally accepted principles 
and practices. 
37. Commending the Agency's activities relating -inter 
alia 
-to 
INES, 
the 
safety 
of 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
in 
Central 
and 
Eastern 
Europe, 
and 
the 
preparation 
of 
new 
Basic 
Safety 
Standards, 
he 
said 
that 
Romania 
had 
benefited 
particularly 
from 
OSART, 
ASSET 
and 
other 
missions 
organized 
by 
the 
Agency 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
its 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
radiation 
protection 
services. 
It 
had 
also 
benefited 
greatly 
in 
the 
past 
year 
from 
Agency 
technical 
assistance 
in 
that 
field, 
and 
his 
delegation 
was 
pleased 
that 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
radiation 
protection 
featured 
so 
prominently 
in 
the 
Agency's 
technical 
co-operation 
programme. 
38. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
use 
of 
nuclear 
techniques 
in 
the 
area 
of 
food 
and 
agriculture, 
an 
area 
of 
great 
importance 
for 
developing 
countries, 
his 
delegation 
welcomed 
the 
notable 
results 
achieved 
in 
the 
past 
and 
also 
the 
detailed 
project 
proposal 
before 
the 
Conference 
for 
introducing 
the 
practical, 
industrial-scale 
utilization 
of 
food 
irradiation 
in 
such 
countries. 
With 
Agency 
help, 
Romania 
was 
embarking 
on 
food 
irradiation 
activities. 
39. 
Recent 
events 
had 
created 
new 
problems 
for 
the 
Agency, 
but 
it 
had 
shown 
itself 
capable 
of 
adapting 
its 
policies 
and 
priorities 
to 
changing 
situations 
and 
needs. 
His 
Government 
appreciated 
that 
and 
would 
continue 
to 
support 
the 
Agency 
in 
the 
fulfilment 
of 
its 
noble 
mission. 
40. 
Mr. 
BRNELIC 
(Croatia) 
said 
that 
the 
Conference 
was 
meeting 
at 
a 
time 
when 
the 
safeguards 
regime 
needed 
to 
be 
strengthened 
and 
made 
universal. 
Croatia 
fully 
supported 
the 
strengthening 
and 
indefinite 
extension 
of 
the 
NPT 
and 
was 
ready 
to 
co-operate 
with 
the 
Agency 
to 
that 
end. 
However, 
it 
was 
concerned 
about 
reported 
cases 
of 
smuggling 
of 
nuclear 
materials, 
including 
materials 
which 
could 
be 
used 
for 
nuclear 
weapons. 
With 
that 
in 
mind, 
Croatia 
welcomed 
recent 
broad 
non-proliferation 
initiatives 
by 
the 
United 
States 
and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 10 


other countries. It would like the Agency to increase its efforts to strengthen the safeguards 
system in order to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 


41. His delegation fully supported the policies applied by the Board of Governors and the 
Director General in implementing the Agency's programme. The promotion of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in the widest sense was vital for most developing countries, including 
Croatia. The Agency's role in promoting the use of ionizing radiation in medicine, 
agriculture, industry and hydrology was irreplaceable. Without Agency assistance many 
developing countries would still be lacking the facilities necessary for cancer radiotherapy, 
while screw worms, tsetse flies and fruit flies would still constitute an unsolved problem. 
Those and other examples of the Agency's promotional activities made it difficult to 
understand why anyone should want to criticize those activities. 
42. His Government appreciated the valuable assistance provided to it already 
during 1992, before Croatia had become a Member of the Agency, particularly in regard to 
the recovery of radiation sources from buildings destroyed by military action. 
43. Innumerable problems were facing the newly independent States, including Croatia. 
One of the most urgent issues in his country was that of creating a radiation protection 
infrastructure as a basis for compliance with international regulations governing the use of 
ionizing radiation. Croatia's priorities accordingly included drafting national radiation safety 
regulations and establishing an adequate infrastructure. Agency technical assistance in that 
area, involving the provision of expert services, was highly appreciated. There had recently 
been a RAPAT mission to Croatia, and the RAPAT had provided his authorities with useful 
guidelines regarding the use of ionizing radiation. 
44. Some newly independent States, especially those with insufficient coal and 
hydroelectric resources, were facing problems with energy supplies. As his country belonged 
to that category, it was considering nuclear energy as a possible source of power and would 
welcome Agency assistance in that connection. First of all, a comprehensive analysis of the 
risks associated with various potential nuclear power plant sites would need to be carried out. 
Also, assistance would be sought with planning studies, project feasibility studies and 
infrastructure development planning, and also in the area of low- and medium-level 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 11 


radioactive waste management. If Croatia embarked on a nuclear power programme, his 
Government would insist on full compliance with international safety standards. 


45. With regard to the use of ionizing radiation in medicine, Croatia's prime interest was 
to reduce the doses to patients in compliance with the latest ICPR recommendations and the 
Agency's forthcoming new Basic Safety Standards. His country was also interested in the 
use of radiation sources in medical diagnostics and research into the effects of radiation on 
selected human tissues. 
46. To sum up, he recalled that, during recent talks with the Director General, 
Dr. Mate Granic, the Croatian Minister of Foreign Affairs, had said that Croatia's priorities 
in the nuclear field were: (1) strengthening of the country's radiation safety infrastructure 
and the elaboration of a national programme for long-term co-operation with the Agency; 
(2) the development of a national energy strategy incorporating all options; and (3) the 
application of ionizing radiation in medicine, with particular emphasis on new diagnostic and 
therapeutic methods and on dose optimization. 
47. Mr. ARGUELLO HURTADO (Nicaragua) said that Agency assistance with 
peaceful applications of nuclear techniques, which was of vital importance to Nicaragua, 
included programmes to improve agricultural production through the study of soil-waterfertilizer 
relationships; animal production programmes aimed at improvements in the 
diagnosis of animal diseases; the introduction of isotope techniques in hydrology; radiocarbon 
data collection at the laboratory of the National University; and a nuclear medicine project 
employing the country's first cobalt-60 teletherapy machine. He thanked the countries especially 
France, Italy and the Scandinavian countries - which had contributed substantial 
shares of the funding required for the activities in question and expressed the hope that other 
activities in his country would receive such support. 
48. Nicaragua, which was aware that the use of radioisotopes and ionizing radiation 
involved hazards, attached great importance to the Agency's assistance in defining safety 
measures to minimize the risks of radiation accidents and appreciated the need for an 
adequate radiation protection infrastructure. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 12 


49. The success of the Agency technical co-operation activities relating to Nicaragua was 
very much a result of the enthusiasm shown by those responsible for transferring technology 
and know-how, and in that regard, he wished to pay tribute to the staff of the Department 
of Technical Co-operation for their dedication in assisting Nicaragua, whose situation 
demanded an almost missionary zeal on their part: projects were frequently hampered by 
apathy; physical conditions were often difficult; and, generally speaking, the country had few 
people with adequate training. Such problems had to be overcome if the ongoing projects 
were to benefit the population and if the foundations were to be laid for more comprehensive 
projects. 
50. Nicaragua firmly supported the NPT, which it considered an essential instrument for 
limiting both vertical and horizontal nuclear weapons proliferation. It also supported the 
international community's efforts to ensure the implementation of United Nations Security 
Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 relating to the conflict in the Persian Gulf. His 
delegation agreed with the words of the United Nations Secretary-General, addressed to the 
Conference, to the effect that it was unacceptable that, as a result of the end of the Cold 
War, the relatively weak should once again become the prey of the relatively strong. 
51. As a Latin American country, Nicaragua could not but be very pleased about the 
agreement reached in the field of non-proliferation by Argentina and Brazil. It hoped that 
the Tlatelolco Treaty would soon be in effect for all the countries of Latin America, thus 
making the region a nuclear-weapon-free zone despite the presence there of the technology 
necessary for nuclear weapons production. 
52. Also, Nicaragua welcomed South Africa's decision to renounce the possession of 
nuclear weapons and to support the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. 
53. Regarding his country's financial obligations, he was pleased to announce that 
Nicaragua was now up to date in its payments to the Agency, having paid off several years' 
accumulated debt, which had been rather large, given the difficult transition Nicaragua was 
currently undergoing from a centralized to a market economy and the fact that for ten years 
it had been the scene of one of the last East-West conflicts of the Cold War. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 13 


54. One of the Agency's fundamental tasks was to apply safeguards and, in general, 
monitor Member States' compliance with their obligations under the NPT, but the task of 
bringing peaceful applications of nuclear energy within the reach of all peoples was an 
equally important one. Accordingly, more resources should be made available for Agency 
technical assistance, especially to Latin America, on which the Agency had to spend very 
little of its safeguards budget. 
55. The poverty, environmental destruction and political chaos prevalent in different parts 
of the world were, like disarmament and non-proliferation, universal issues creating 
challenges for the whole of humanity. The situation seemed to be deteriorating from day to 
day despite the fact that, paradoxically, the world had actually become more secure. Given 
the potential of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy for counteracting poverty and 
underdevelopment, it was not only morally unacceptable, but also politically counterproductive 
to skimp on the resources needed for promoting them. While not wanting to play 
down the dangers associated with nuclear energy, he wished to stress that poverty, 
environmental destruction and political chaos in a world of shrinking opportunities were 
factors which, together, represented a time-bomb which, albeit not nuclear, could blow up 
in the face of the whole of humanity. 
56. Mr. ORJUELA BERMEO (Colombia) said his Government believed that a 
proper balance should exist between the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and control of its 
misuse. That balance could be achieved through the safeguards system, which had its legal 
basis in the Statute and was vital to the implementation of the NPT. For that reason, his 
Government called on all States with nuclear programmes, large or small, whether they were 
party to the NPT or not, to submit all their nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards, thereby 
helping to strengthen the Agency and ensure the peace and prosperity of the world. 
57. One could not overemphasize the importance of the safety of nuclear facilities for the 
peaceful use of atomic energy under the environmentally friendly conditions necessary for 
the survival of the planet. 
58. It was vital for all Member States of the Agency to co-operate in the use of the 
Agency's services for enhancing operational safety and promoting the effective application 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 14 


of the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention on 
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency. 


59. Colombia, as a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, welcomed and encouraged moves 
towards the creation of further nuclear-weapon-free zones in the world. It was sure that, if 
such projects came to fruition, they would serve to increase mutual confidence between States 
and strengthen peace and security in all regions. 
60. Colombia, which earnestly hoped for a just, peaceful and lasting solution to the 
nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula, maintained that frank and constructive dialogue was 
the only way to solve differences between civilized nations. 
61. The preparations for the NPT Review and Extension Conference, to be held in 1995, 
offered a fresh opportunity to examine ways of ensuring that States party to the NPT enjoyed 
freer access to nuclear technology. It was of the utmost importance to eliminate the existing 
restrictions on access to nuclear technology and to guarantee reliable supplies of materials 
and equipment. Energy requirements were increasing daily, and nuclear power continued 
to be one of the few sources offering rational solutions to crucial economic and human 
problems. 
62. It would be worth examining the idea of setting up an international nuclear materials 
bank, administered by the Agency, which would guarantee supplies - under safeguards - of 
nuclear materials and equipment in the event of an unforeseen supply interruption. Likewise, 
the idea of establishing a databank on the flow of nuclear materials, to serve as a basis for 
the joint international administration of nuclear energy, might also be worth examining. 
63. Excellent results had been achieved everywhere in Latin America through ARCAL 
projects, and Colombia wished to reiterate its support for ARCAL and to thank the Agency 
for its contribution. 
64. The Colombian Institute of Nuclear Science and Alternative Energies (INEA) had 
participated actively in the analysis of the recent energy crisis, helping to identify ways of 
saving energy through the application of strategies for its rational and efficient use and 
seeking to direct the interest of the consumer towards more efficient equipment and practices. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 15 


It was also involved in research on the use of different energy sources, including the nuclear 
option. 


65. In order to fulfil the tasks before it, the Institute had established four main 
programmes: 1. Nuclear sciences; 2. Alternative energies; 3. Rational and efficient use of 
energy; and 4. Energy studies. 
66. With regard to applications of nuclear technology, INEA was pursuing research and 
development work in industry, health, agriculture, fundamental sciences and education. At 
the present time there were five principal areas of work: (1) radiation protection; 
(2) applications of ionizing radiation; (3) modernization of Colombia's research reactor; 
(4) energy studies; and (5) post-graduate training. 
67. Within the framework of a national radiation protection programme, a detailed 
inventory was being made of facilities in which radioactive materials were present, the aim 
being - inter alia - to introduce modern radiation protection legislation, and ensure the 
rational and efficient treatment of radioactive waste. 
68. In Colombia's private sector there was growing interest in various uses of ionizing 
radiation - for example, in industry, agriculture and medicine. A committee had been set up 
with the task of initiating studies to determine national needs regarding applications of 
ionizing radiation, and the country had acquired a semi-industrial gamma irradiation 
capability with the delivery of a 100 000 Ci cobalt-60 source obtained with the Agency's 
assistance. 
69. Colombia' s IAN-R1 research reactor, which was being modernized with the assistance 
of the Agency, was switching from high-enriched to low-enriched uranium fuel. Once the 
reactor had been modernized, INEA would use it for radioisotope production and various 
other applications of scientific and commercial interest. 
70. In the field of energy studies, a group capable of developing nuclear power planning 
models was being formed within the framework of INEA, the ultimate aim being to establish 
an institute which would - inter alia - develop nuclear-related technologies and provide the 
bodies responsible for Colombia's energy policies with up-to-date information on the role of 
nuclear power in energy planning. The group would be staffed with physicists, electrical 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 16 


engineers, energy planners and others who had received specialized training thanks to the 
Agency. 


71. Post-graduate training was being provided in medical physics, radiation safety, 
radiation chemistry and non-destructive testing, the aim being to create a "critical mass" of 
specialists familiar with the nuclear techniques of interest to Colombia. 
72. In conclusion, he expressed his Government's appreciation of the Agency' s continuing 
support of INEA; it had enabled Colombia to make significant advances in research and 
development relating to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
73. Mr. MARTYNENKO (Belarus) said that his country, which had recently 
celebrated the second anniversary of its independence, was firmly committed to attaining nonnuclear-
weapon status. By April 1992 all tactical nuclear weapons had been removed from 
Belarus, and in February 1993 it had ratified START and the Lisbon protocol thereto. On 
23 July 1993 his country had deposited its instrument of accession to the NPT as a nonnuclear-
weapon State. As a full party to the treaty, Belarus would participate actively in 
preparations for the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference. 
74. Belarus supported multilateral talks with a view to a universal test ban and a cessation 
of the production of fissile material for military purposes. The time was right to draw up 
a multilateral agreement (convention) whereby the nuclear-weapon States guaranteed the 
safety of the non-nuclear-weapon States. 
75. The Agency' s activities in the field of nuclear safety were of fundamental importance. 
With regard to the safety of ageing nuclear power plants, the decision whether such a plant 
should continue operating had implications beyond national boundaries; accordingly, the 
decision-making process should be controlled by the Agency. Belarus was particularly 
interested in the Agency's initiatives regarding the safety of nuclear power plants in Central 
and Eastern Europe and in countries of the former Soviet Union. 
76. He commended the joint initiative of UNDP and the Agency aimed at strengthening 
radiation protection and nuclear safety infrastructure in countries of the former Soviet Union. 
The Forum which had taken place in May 1993 had demonstrated the timeliness of the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 17 


initiative. His delegation hoped that, once the needs of the States in question had been 
finally determined, UNDP and the Agency would provide practical assistance. 


77. Belarus attached great importance to the conclusion of a nuclear safety convention 
and, in common with a number of other countries, felt that the work of the Group of Experts 
responsible for preparing the draft should be accelerated. The convention should require 
the safety upgrading of existing nuclear power plants to the levels established by the 
convention. International co-operation would be required for such upgrading, and he hoped 
the final text would be worded with that in mind. 
78. His country was participating in the review of the Basic Safety Standards - an activity 
of particular interest to it in view of the adjustments being made to the State programme for 
minimizing the consequences of the Chernobyl accident. 
79. Belarus was in the process of establishing an up-to-date legislative and regulatory 
framework for its nuclear activities. Steps were being taken to set up a State system of 
accounting for and control of nuclear material, and a State committee for the supervision of 
safety in - inter alia - the nuclear power sector (Gospromatomnadzor) had been created. 
Belarus had acceded to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material earlier 
in the current year, and it was considering accession to the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Joint Protocol relating to the application of the Vienna 
and Paris Conventions. 
80. In view of the great importance which his country attached to the Agency's technical 
assistance programme, it had decided to make a voluntary contribution of 85 million roubles 
to the TACF. 
81. The Chernobyl accident had left an indelible mark on all aspects of life in Belarus. 
Its consequences were felt at the social, psychological, political and environmental levels. 
Complex physical and chemical processes were taking place in the soil, in the air and in flora 
and fauna and were having a profound effect on human life. His country was therefore 
extremely interested in any decisions taken by the Agency with a view to alleviating the 
situation. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 18 


82. His country intended to co-operate with the Agency in developing a strategy for the 
radiation protection of populations, in studying the effects of low radiation doses and in 
developing production technologies for use in contaminated areas. His Government was 
grateful to the Agency for implementing, in collaboration with FAO and the Norwegian 
Government, a project - referred to by the Director General in his statement - which had 
brought about a two- to threefold reduction in the caesium content of milk and meat in 
regions affected by the Chernobyl accident. 
83. His Government was making every effort to cope with the unprecedentedly complex 
tasks involved in creating normal living conditions for the people living in those regions. 
Major resources had been allocated to building homes for those who had been resettled. 
Medical care was being organized and methods for deactivating and disposing of radioactive 
waste and deactivation products were being developed. 
84. The Agency should endeavour to assess the prevailing post-Chernobyl situation in the 
light of local phenomena and on the basis of the risks faced by individuals rather than on the 
basis of averaging and collective risk concepts. A great body of experimental material now 
available for biomedical, physical and chemical investigations was being lost - investigations 
which could serve as the basis for the provision of help in the event of radiological 
emergencies. Because of fragmentation and chaotic financing, the various Agency studies 
were not generating reliable information and data. The priorities governing the allocation 
of Agency budgetary resources should therefore be changed. Unfortunately, the interest in 
the Chernobyl issue on the part of both the Secretariat and the main donor countries appeared 
to be declining. He appealed to donor countries to help implement projects which were very 
important for Belarus and also of considerable interest for the international community. 
85. Belarus was currently going through a severe energy crisis due to a shortage of fuel 
and to the fact that its electricity generating capacity was inadequate. One possible solution 
to the problem was nuclear power. If the Government decided to build a nuclear power 
plant, it would require the active support of the Agency. 
86. Mr. MIK (Slovak Republic) said it was a great pleasure for him to be 
addressing the Conference as representative of a full Member of the Agency, which the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 19 


Slovak Republic recognized as an organization promoting international technology transfer 
and providing the international community with evidence of the utilization of nuclear 
materials exclusively for peaceful purposes. 


87. In his country, nuclear power was playing a major role in the energy sector, the four 
power reactors in operation at Bohunice accounting for 49.5% of total electricity production 
in 1992 - the fourth highest percentage figure in the world for the nuclear share of electricity 
production. 
88. The picture regarding the country's power reactors was rather complex: there was 
a heavy-water-moderated gas-cooled reactor at Bohunice being decommissioned; two of the 
reactors in operation at Bohunice (WWER-440/230s) were about to undergo major safety 
upgrading; and four reactors of the WWER-440/213 type were under construction at 
Mochovce. Particular attention was being devoted to two WWER-440/230s at Bohunice, 
which were currently in operation under temporary permits. Between 1991 and the first half 
of 1993, some 90 safety upgrading measures had been implemented, and major safety 
upgrading was now being prepared. At a meeting convened by the Agency in July, experts 
from six countries had reviewed the safety upgrading proposals and agreed that they were 
technically feasible. 
89. With regard to the two other power reactors in operation at Bohunice (WWER440/
213s), a comprehensive safety evaluation had been initiated with a view to subsequent 
safety upgrading. A substantial contribution to that effort was expected from Agency 
regional technical co-operation project RER/9/004, "Safety analysis of WWER-type 
reactors", for which the WWER-440/213s at Bohunice were serving as reference reactors. 
90. Future electricity demand in Slovakia would, of course, depend on the progress of 
industry and of the economy in general and on success in effecting energy savings. Different 
scenarios had been prepared for the purpose of estimating the plant capacities likely to be 
needed over the next decade. In any event, the nuclear power plants now in operation and 
under construction would play a substantial role. The four reactors under construction at 
Mochovce were to become operational before the year 2000. No final decision about the 
continued operation of the two WWER-440/230s at Bohunice had yet been taken, but it 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 20 


would be difficult to meet the country's electricity demand without substantial electricity 
imports if they were shut down before the Mochovce reactors became operational. However, 
absolute priority would be given to safety when the final decision was taken. In that 
connection, the Slovak Republic supported elaboration of an international convention on 
nuclear safety. 


91. The Slovak Government, which was aware of its responsibilities arising out of the 
country's large-scale utilization of nuclear energy, had that year set up a Nuclear Regulatory 
Authority as an independent State agency reporting directly to it. The Authority was 
responsible for the safety of nuclear facilities (covering all stages of the fuel cycle), the 
treatment of radioactive wastes, safeguards and - to some extent - the use of radioactive 
substances. It was also responsible for the fulfilment of the Slovak Republic's obligations 
under international agreements relating to nuclear safety and nuclear materials. 
92. The Slovak Republic believed that, in the interests of a reasonable international 
consensus on safety-related actions, countries should be transparent about the safety status 
of their nuclear facilities and the efficiency of their State regulatory bodies. Accordingly, 
since the beginning of the year it had received six Agency expert teams focusing on different 
aspects of nuclear safety. 
93. The Agency technical assistance programme was important for Slovakia, whose 
qualified manpower and financial resources were very limited. Support was especially 
needed in areas such as nuclear legislation, nuclear safety, radioactive waste treatment and 
disposal, personnel dosimetry, radiation protection and personnel training. At the same time, 
his Government had decided to contribute to the TACF Slovakia's full share of the targets 
for 1993 and 1994. 
94. The Slovak Republic intended to continue its active co-operation with the Agency by 
organizing training courses and technical meetings and by providing expert services and 
fellowships. It believed there was also a potential for the provision of specialized services 
in such fields as safeguards inspector training and software development. The favourable 
location of Slovakia, the facilities available there and the technical capabilities of its 
specialists could facilitate the implementation of many Agency programmes. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 21 


95. The Slovak Republic favoured the introduction of new safeguards methods and 
appreciated the results achieved so far in that connection. It was now a member of the 
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG) - and also of the Zangger Committee - and had participated 
in the NSG's March meeting in Lucerne. 
96. The Slovak Republic would like to see strict safeguards applied throughout the world 
and a ban on nuclear weapons testing. Accordingly, it hoped that all countries not yet party 
to the NPT would accede to it soon and that those countries which were contemplating 
withdrawal from the NPT or even calling for its discontinuation would reconsider their 
position. 
97. The Slovak Republic appreciated the Agency's inspection activities in Iraq and 
the DPRK. It also appreciated the decision of Argentina and South Africa to join the NSG 
and to accept its guidelines. 
98. With regard to civil liability for nuclear damage, legislation on that subject was being 
prepared in Slovakia, which aimed to become a party to the Vienna Convention soon. 
99. Mr. JOKONYA (Zimbabwe), noting that the world had witnessed fundamental 
political changes over the past few years, said that the end of the disastrous confrontation 
between East and West had ushered in an era more conducive to international co-operation 
and that the Agency should seize the resulting opportunity and work for the complete 
removal of the nuclear threat and for the realization of the full potential of the utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
100. The Agency was playing a crucial role, through its safeguards activities, in preventing 
the proliferation of nuclear weapons and related nuclear devices. It was continuing to 
achieve considerable successes in that connection, and his delegation was encouraged by the 
arrangements being made for the introduction of new or modified mechanisms designed to 
increase the effectiveness and efficiency of Agency safeguards. 
101. Prompted by the challenges of the new era, his country had collaborated with the 
United Nations Department for Disarmament and the Organization of African Unity in 
convening, in Harare, a regional meeting of experts to start work on drafting a treaty for 
making Africa a nuclear-weapon-free continent - a long-cherished African dream. He hoped 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 22 


that the Agency would provide technical support for such regional efforts, in line with what 
was requested in resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/577 adopted by the General Conference 
in 1992. 


102. Zimbabwe, which attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, welcomed the fact that Africa's share in the programme had risen from 19.9% 
in 1991 to 26.2% in 1992; he hoped that Africa's share would rise further. 
103. Technical co-operation with the Agency had enabled Zimbabwe to make considerable 
progress in applying nuclear techniques and using isotopes in priority sectors such as health, 
agriculture and stock-breeding. Some problems had not yet been solved, however, and 
further co-operation with the Agency was required. Thanking the Department of Technical 
Co-operation for the tangible improvements made in project implementation, he said that the 
regional workshops on technical co-operation, project preparation, pre-project assistance and 
country review missions were indicative of the Secretariat's commitment to the proper 
implementation and management of projects in Africa. In that connection, he urged that 
more African experts be used for Agency missions to Africa since they were better 
acquainted with the conditions there. 
104. With regard to the Agency's precarious financial situation, which was a cause of great 
concern, he said that a number of Member States had not fulfilled their financial obligations 
vis-a-vis the Regular Budget. At the same time he emphasized that, because of political 
destabilization, environmental disasters and economic hardship, many developing countries 
found it difficult or almost impossible to fulfil their obligations. 
105. The worst drought in living memory had ravaged the whole of Southern Africa 
in 1992. Although conditions in the region had improved since then, the drought-prone 
African countries still needed Agency help in carrying out co-ordinated research programmes 
in the agricultural sector. The Agency's 1992 technical co-operation programme had placed 
considerable emphasis on food and agriculture, which had accounted for 18.3% of the 
programme disbursements. His delegation welcomed that fact and also the efforts being 
made to initiate projects on the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing 
countries. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 23 


106. With regard to the handling and disposal of spent radiation sources, he expressed 
appreciation of the RAPAT and WAMAP missions organized by the Agency. With regard 
to education and training in radiological protection and nuclear safety, he welcomed the fact 
that two pilot interregional post-graduate educational courses in radiation protection (one to 
be held in English and one in French) were planned for 1994. 
107. The Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety and radiological protection were 
of benefit to the whole of humanity, but as those activities related directly to power reactor 
safety his delegation believed that they should be financed from extrabudgetary funds. The 
Agency's budgetary resources should be used primarily for improving safety in the 
application of nuclear techniques in agriculture and medicine and for enhancing the radiation 
protection infrastructures of developing countries. 
108. Zimbabwe, which had done much to strengthen its radiation protection services, 
would welcome Agency assistance with the training of radiation protection officers. 
109. The end of the East-West confrontation had unfortunately not been accompanied by 
general world stability. In fact, the main "peace dividend" appeared to be countless regional 
conflicts. That would not facilitate the work of the Agency, but Zimbabwe would continue 
to co-operate with the Agency as it endeavoured to achieve its objectives. 
110. Mr. ZUBI (Jordan) said that the recent efforts to bring about a lasting and 
comprehensive peace in the Middle East were being jeopardized by Israel, which was 
persisting in its refusal to accede to the NPT and place all its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. If genuine peace was to be achieved in the Middle East, the threat of weapons 
of mass destruction had to be eliminated entirely from the region. As Israel was the only 
State in the region with the capacity to make nuclear weapons, the application of Agency 
safeguards to all Israeli nuclear facilities was absolutely essential. 
111. As a member of the Group of 77, Jordan supported the Group's view regarding the 
universal reporting of imports and exports of nuclear materials and equipment and certain 
non-nuclear materials used for nuclear purposes: such reporting should remain voluntary, 
and the Agency should not be burdened with additional verification responsibilities. Rather, 
with the recent improvements in international relations and the new prospects for peace and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 24 


understanding in some parts of the world, greater priority should be given to technical 
assistance. 


112. In that context, he thanked the Agency for having over the years provided Jordan with 
substantial assistance in the establishment of infrastructure for the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy and the development of radiological protection services. Experts from the 
Agency had been assisting with a pre-feasibility study for a training centre which the Agency 
had agreed to help establish. 
113. Jordan appreciated the Agency's support for regional projects in areas such as 
environmental radiation monitoring, and he recalled how the Agency had helped establish an 
early warning network in Jordan following the Chernobyl accident. With the co-operation 
of the Agency and the Arabic Atomic Energy Agency, the feasibility was being studied of 
extending the network beyond Jordan's boundaries to include other Arab countries; he hoped 
that the Agency would support such a project. 
114. Jordan welcomed the Agency's activities relating to the production of potable water 
using nuclear energy. Water shortages were a cause of political instability in the Middle 
East, and he looked forward to the day when nuclear energy would be used in providing the 
region with sufficient water at a reasonable cost. 
115. Welcoming the Agency' s efforts to help develop the potential of developing countries 
in the field of food irradiation, he said that the Middle East suffered serious agricultural 
losses owing to the climatic conditions and the high cost of traditional means of food 
preservation. In that connection, he expressed the hope that the Agency would help in 
launching an urgently needed programme for promoting the use of nuclear techniques in 
agriculture in the Middle East, which - given the difficult conditions there - could serve as 
a testing ground for many techniques of potential benefit to the entire world. 
116. Some relatively advanced European countries were treated by the Agency in much the 
same way as countries of the Middle East for technical assistance purposes, despite the fact 
that the European countries in question were interested mainly in receiving assistance in the 
field of nuclear safety and radiation protection while the Middle East countries accorded 
priority to the introduction of nuclear techniques. He suggested that the Agency establish 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 25 


a programme on the lines of RCA covering Europe and the Middle East and said that Jordan 
would be happy to host a meeting convened for the purpose of considering the feasibility of 
such a programme. 


117. Like many other developing countries wishing to benefit from the peaceful uses of 
nuclear techniques, Jordan needed help with education and training in radiological protection. 
In that connection he urged the Secretariat to arrange for Arabic to be used as a language of 
instruction in some of the Agency's interregional and regional courses on that subject. 
Jordan was willing to co-operate with the Agency and the Arabic Atomic Energy Agency to 
that end. 
118. Stating that the representation of the Middle East and South Asia and of Africa in the 
Board of Governors had long been recognized as inadequate, he called for an expansion of 
the Board in order to rectify the situation. He also called for an increase in the proportion 
of Secretariat staff members coming from developing countries, in order to increase the 
contribution of those countries to the work of the Agency. 
119. Although it supported the proposed budget for 1994, his delegation was opposed to 
the continued application of the zero-real-growth principle in the face of the Agency's 
growing responsibilities and the developing countries' growing needs. The continued 
dependence of technical assistance activities on voluntary contributions was also regrettable, 
deplored by his delegation, which believed that stable financing should be provided for those 
activities through the Regular Budget. 
120. Mr. FASSI FIHRI (Morocco), emphasizing the importance which his country 
attached both to Agency safeguards and to Agency technical assistance, said that the 
credibility of safeguards was essential to the creation of a climate of confidence and 
international co-operation conducive to nuclear technology transfer for economic and social 
development purposes. 
121. His delegation welcomed the transparency and the spirit of co-operation displayed by 
South Africa in implementing its NPT safeguards agreement with the Agency. It also 
welcomed the recent positive changes in the Middle East; they suggested that it should be 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 26 


possible to establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction 
in that region. 


122. Morocco was aware of the advantages of the many applications of nuclear techniques 
and was trying to promote the use of such techniques in important sectors such as 
agriculture, medicine, hydrology and industry. The Deputy Director General for Technical 
Co-operation, Mr. Qian, had visited Morocco earlier that year and had been able to see the 
advances made and the potential for further progress in radiation therapy, hydrology, animal 
health and a number of other areas. 

123. As part of the effort to consolidate its national scientific and technical infrastructure, 
Morocco was setting up a centre for nuclear studies which would have a research reactor, 
to be used - inter alia - for training and radioisotope production. Already the country's 
National Centre for Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology (CNESTEN) was providing 
support for bodies working in fields such as sedimentology, environmental protection, nuclear 
medicine and radioactive waste management. In that connection he recalled that in April a 
WAMAP team had visited Morocco in order to help CNESTEN draw up a national plan for 
the management of radioactive waste. 
124. The Agency had also been helping Morocco with the drafting of basic legal texts on 
subjects such as radiological protection, the licensing and supervision of nuclear facilities, 
the transport and physical protection of radioactive materials, and liability for nuclear 
damage. 
125. Morocco was interested in diversifying its energy sources, and the nuclear option was 
receiving serious consideration in that context. Siting and feasibility studies for a nuclear 
power plant were nearing completion, the results to be used in determining the role of 
nuclear power within the national energy production system. 
126. In May a National Nuclear Energy Council had been set up to co-ordinate national 
policy on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to co-ordinate scientific and technical activities 
involving the utilization of nuclear techniques, to supervise the utilization of such techniques, 
to advise on regulatory matters relating to nuclear energy applications and to help in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 27 


determining priority areas for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 

127. Morocco had decided to set up a national radiation protection centre, and construction 
work had already started. The centre would - inter alia - monitor the implementation of 
radiation protection regulations and engage in training and research activities. 
128. Morocco had also decided to strengthen its participation in AFRA, which was 
acquiring great significance for the African continent and demonstrating the importance of 
the Agency's role in the dissemination of nuclear techniques. Thanks to AFRA, many 
countries of Africa were developing the human resources and infrastructures necessary for 
the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. In that connection, he expressed his country's 
gratitude to the French and Spanish Governments for the way in which they were supporting 
Africa. 
129. In 1993 Morocco had hosted a seminar on the planning of regional projects for water 
resource evaluation in arid and semi-arid regions. It had also hosted meetings on 
radioimmunoassay techniques and the production of reagents for radioimmunoassay and also 
a regional training course for users of such reagents. 
130. Recalling that in June his country had hosted a meeting convened within the 
framework of a regional programme for controlling the Mediterranean fruit fly by means of 
the sterile-insect technique, he thanked the Agency for supporting that programme and also 
for its support of activities relating to seawater desalination using nuclear power. 
131. In conclusion, he said that the needs of developing Member States for Agency 
technical assistance were still growing and that a way should be found of financing that 
assistance from predictable and assured resources. In any event, the TACF's resources 
should be increased in line with the growing needs of developing Member States. 
132. Mr. CACCIA DOMINIONI (Commission of the European Communities) said 
that the CEC had important responsibilities under the EURATOM Treaty, responsibilities 
which gave it an active role in the international nuclear community. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 28 


133. In his statement the previous year, he had highlighted some major developments - the 
completion of the single European market, the Maastricht Treaty and the Rio de Janeiro 
Conference on Environment and Development - which were shaping international affairs. 
134. Regarding the liberalization and opening-up of the electricity and gas markets, 
referred to in that statement as pillars of the single European energy market, much remained 
to be done. The CEC's proposals, which were still being examined in the Council of 
Ministers and the European Parliament, would put an end to exclusive rights to generate 
electricity and construct electricity power lines and gas pipelines, and also impose an 
obligation on transmission and distribution companies to offer certain large consumers and 
distributors access to their networks (third-party access). Progress was slow, which was 
hardly surprising given the technical, economic and political implications of the proposals. 
135. Steps had been taken to start implementing the energy-related recommendations of the 
Rio Conference - namely, the recommendations concerning carbon dioxide emissions. 
Directives had been issued concerning measures to limit such emissions and improve energy 
efficiency in buildings, transport and industry (SAVE). Also, a Community programme for 
the promotion of renewable energy sources (ALTENER) had been adopted, together with a 
mechanism for monitoring national programmes to reduce the emission of carbon dioxide and 
other greenhouse gases. On the other hand, a proposal - made by the CEC to the Council 
of Ministers - for the introduction of a tax on carbon dioxide emissions and energy was still 
under discussion. 
136. The Maastricht Treaty had now been ratified by 11 of the Community's 12 member 
States. Once in force, the Treaty would enhance the role of the European Community, 
which would become the European Union. 
137. The CEC was also involved - both directly and indirectly - in various other 
developments taking place in the nuclear field. The developments affecting nuclear trade, 
nuclear safeguards and nuclear safety reflected the search for a new balance in a world 
undergoing rapid change. 
138. International trade relations in general were at a difficult stage, as shown by the fact 
that much remained to be done in the "Uruguay Round" - the multilateral trade negotiations 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 29 


launched in September 1986 and originally scheduled for completion in 1990. Similarly, in 
the energy sector, difficulties over questions of principle were being encountered in the 
negotiations on a legally binding Basic Agreement to implement the European Energy Charter 
signed in the Hague in December 1991. That agreement would set out such things as the 
general rules for trade in the energy sector, conditions of competition, conditions for access 
to capital and rules concerning the transfer of technology, but because of the aforementioned 
difficulties the text of a Nuclear Protocol setting forth principles of "good nuclear 
citizenship" for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the safety of nuclear installations, 
and also for co-operation in those areas had not yet been finalized. It was hoped, however, 
that agreement on both texts would be reached by the end of the year. 

139. The ongoing work of the Nuclear Suppliers Group was, of course, also important for 
nuclear trade. In 1992, the CEC had submitted to the Council a proposal for a regulation 
dealing at the Community level with the regime agreed upon in Warsaw that year for the 
export of nuclear-related dual-use items. The Council was still discussing the regulation, 
whose purpose was to respond to the principles of the Community's internal market and to 
respect the non-proliferation commitments emanating from international regimes. 
140. Since the break-up of the Soviet Union, the uranium market had been confronted with 
a large flow of material of CIS origin, which was jeopardizing its stability. For example, 
acquisitions in the Community of natural uranium of CIS origin had increased from zero 
in 1989 to 3000 tonnes in 1992, the latter figure representing about 25 % of the Community's 
annual needs. Large imports at artificially low prices would obviously endanger the viability 
of uranium production in non-CIS countries and might prevent the necessary diversification 
of supply sources, thereby threatening the long-term security of supply. It was not 
surprising, therefore, that corrective action had been taken. In the United States an antidumping 
procedure had led to the signing of what were termed "suspension agreements". 
In the Community, imports were examined on a case-by-case basis in order to ensure regular 
and equitable access to supplies for all Community users in conformity with the EURATOM 
Treaty. Guidelines concerning quantities and prices had been drawn up and were taken into 
account in the examination of contracts involving CIS-origin nuclear materials. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 30 


141. The Community nevertheless attached great importance to CIS countries as partners 
on the supply side and had negotiated a nuclear trade agreement with the Russian Federation, 
together with agreements for co-operation in nuclear fusion and nuclear safety. Those 
agreements were now awaiting ratification. The case for similar agreements between the 
Community and the CIS countries engaged in uranium production and supply was being 
studied, and contacts had been initiated to that end. Naturally, such agreements would have 
to take account of the different countries' non-proliferation commitments. 
142. Turning to the subject of safeguards, he said that the CEC also had important 
responsibilities in managing the Community's regional safeguards system. Considerable 
progress had been made since 1992 in implementing the new Partnership Approach under the 
NPT safeguards agreement between the Agency, the European Community and the 
Community's non-nuclear-weapon member States. That approach should result in a level of 
Agency inspection that was lower than the level applicable under safeguards agreements 
covering comparable nuclear facilities not subject to any regional safeguards system. In the 
present budgetary situation, the expected reduction of 2000 inspection person-days would be 
most welcome. The CEC would therefore make every effort to maintain the momentum 
gained, and it was sure that the Agency would do likewise. 
143. At the CEC's request, the Council of Ministers had approved amendments to the 
EURATOM Regulation No. 3227/76 concerning the application of the provisions regarding 
EURATOM safeguards. Those amendments, which had entered into force the previous 
month, would enable the CEC to support efforts to strengthen international safeguards and 
non-proliferation arrangements; they were already enabling it to provide the Agency with 
important additional information. 
144. The appearance of nuclear materials on the West European black market suggested 
that there might be some slackening of the safeguards and verification system in certain 
areas. The member States of the Community, the European Parliament and the CEC had 
acted promptly by making funds available and supporting activities with a view to the 
development of effective and efficient control systems in the CIS countries. The systems 
developed in collaboration with the CIS countries would be designed to comply with Agency 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 31 


requirements - and thus contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear materials - and to 
minimize the hazards associated with the illicit trade in nuclear materials. 

145. Regarding nuclear safety, he said that the CEC had followed with satisfaction the 
progress made to date towards establishing a nuclear safety convention, which it believed 
would prove to be a valuable tool for ensuring a high level of nuclear safety worldwide. He 
was confident that the drafting work would continue satisfactorily and that the Community 
would accede to the convention in respect of those areas - such as radiation protection where 
it had competence. It had, in fact, already taken appropriate steps in that direction. 
146. The safety of nuclear installations continued to provide a focus for concerted action 
in the European Community. The CEC was now presenting to the Council of Ministers a 
comprehensive report on the implementation in its 1992 Resolution preparing the way for a 
Community nuclear safety system, together with an outline of a strategy for radioactive waste 
management. Concerted action was necessary in order to ensure the internal coherence - and 
hence the Community character - of the support being provided through the PHARE and 
TACIS programmes for the improvement of nuclear safety throughout Europe. 
147. The safety of nuclear power plants in the former Soviet Union and in Central Europe 
continued to be the subject of international attention. Although progress had been made in 
implementing the safety programme agreed at the Munich Summit, it had been felt necessary 
at the Tokyo Summit to reiterate the need for urgent safety measures - co-ordinated through 
the G-24 - in order to ensure genuine improvements at the plants still causing concern. 
148. The CEC had been invested with special responsibility for G-24 co-ordination and had 
set up a G-24 Nuclear Safety Assistance Co-ordination Centre, for which the Agency would 
be acting as a technical adviser. The CEC and the Agency had exchanged experts and linked 
their two databases, which they would continue to expand in a complementary manner; also, 
they were taking part in each other's meetings. Last but not least, representatives of the 
CEC and the G-24 were taking part in the ASSET, OSART and other safety-related missions 
organized by the Agency. 
149. In addition to the Community, there were now 14 donor States, and five international 
organizations - the Agency, NEA, EBRD, EEB and the World Bank - engaged in providing 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 32 


assistance to 11 beneficiaries. The assistance was being provided through 451 projects, with 
budgets totalling 460 million ECU. Under the PHARE and TACIS programmes, the 
Community accounted for more than half of the effort involved. 


150. A further aspect of nuclear safety assistance deserving special attention was third-party 
liability, which was proving to be a serious problem for assistance programmes as Western 
companies supplying goods and services were reluctant to expose themselves to damage 
claims arising from nuclear accidents. Hardly any of the recipient States concerned were so 
far parties to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, but the situation 
might improve somewhat if revision of the Convention resulted in broader adherence. It was 
therefore important that the negotiations on its revision be concluded soon. 
151. The European Community and the Agency were engaged in revising their respective 
basic safety standards for radiation protection in the light of the latest scientific findings and 
the ICRP's 1990 recommendations. Satisfactory co-operation in that area had been 
established between the CEC on one hand and the Agency and other interested international 
organizations on the other. There would thus be full compatibility between the two sets of 
standards, and the specific features of the Community Directive would be preserved. In that 
context, mention ought perhaps to be made of two directives on radiation protection which 
were also necessary for the single European market. One covered temporary workers, whose 
mobility was now less restricted, while the other dealt with the movement of radioactive 
materials now that there were no frontier controls or customs procedures. Both directives 
had already entered into force. 
152. The problems and challenges of today, which had formed the subject of his statement 
so far, were of the utmost importance, but it was also necessary to prepare for tomorrow. 
Controlled thermonuclear fusion therefore continued to have high priority among the research 
activities of the European Community whose efforts in that area were focused on magnetic 
confinement. 
153. In 1992 the Community, together with the United States, Japan and the Russian 
Federation, had signed a co-operation agreement on engineering design activities for ITER. 
Those activities, planned to last six years, would result in a detailed plan for a reactor 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 33 


demonstrating the scientific and technological feasibility of using fusion energy for peaceful 
purposes. The joint central team had its base at three locations of equal importance -
Garching in Europe, San Diego in the United States and Naka in Japan - and was led by a 
European scientist. 

ANNOUNCEMENT CONCERNING A NEW MEMBER OF THE AGENCY 

154. The PRESIDENT announced that Armenia, whose application for admission 
had been approved on Monday, had deposited its instrument of acceptance of the Statute with 
the Government of the United States of America, thereby becoming a Member of the 
Agency. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS 

155. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1989 the Conference had approved a 
procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate or candidates from 
a particular area, no secret ballot was held; balloting took place in respect only of those areas 
for which there was no agreed slate. That procedure considerably facilitated the rational use 
of the Conference's time. 
156. Accordingly, he proposed that the procedure be followed at the Conference's current 
session and that, as in the previous few years, Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure, which 
provided that elections to the Board should be held by secret ballot, be suspended in respect 
of the areas for which no secret ballot was to be held. 
157. Having drawn the Conference's attention to document GC(XXXVII)/1087, he said 
agreement had been reached among the Member States in all areas except the Middle East 
and South Asia. There were two candidates for the one seat to be filled by a Member from 
the Middle East and South Asia, and a secret ballot would therefore have to be held in 
respect of that area. 
158. He assumed that the General Conference wished to elect Colombia and Cuba to the 
two seats for Latin America. 
159. Colombia and Cuba were duly elected. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 34 


160. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect Ireland 
and Switzerland to the two seats for Western Europe. 
161. Ireland and Switzerland were duly elected. 
162. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect Poland 
and Ukraine to the two seats for Eastern Europe. 
163. Poland and Ukraine were duly elected. 
164. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect 
Ethiopia and Tunisia to the two seats for Africa. 
165. Ethiopia and Tunisia were duly elected. 
166. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect the 
Philippines to the seat for the Far East. 
167. The Philippines was duly elected. 
168. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect 
Indonesia, from the area of South East Asia and the Pacific, to fill the so-called "floating" 
seat. 
169. Indonesia was duly elected. 
170. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference proceed to elect a member 
from the area of the Middle East and South Asia. 
171. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that his country had 
acceded to the NPT at an early date and had subsequently entered into a full-scope safeguards 
agreement with the Agency in accordance with its general policy of openness and 
transparency in all nuclear activities. Also, it had co-operated with the Agency in all the 
main areas of Agency activity. In 1990 the Islamic Republic of Iran had been elected to a 
seat on the Board of Governors for the first time after more than a decade. The records of 
the Board's proceedings reflected the sincere efforts of his country while serving as a Board 
member to make a positive contribution to the work of the Agency at a time when the Board 
had been dealing with a number of important and complex issues. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.359 
page 35 


172. As the President had indicated, there were two candidates for the seat to be filled by 
a Member State from the Middle East and South Asia group; they were Lebanon and the 
Islamic Republic of Iran. In a spirit of co-operation and goodwill, however, he wished to 
announce that his country was withdrawing its candidature and hoped that Lebanon would 
serve effectively as a member of the Board. 
173. The Islamic Republic of Iran would seek a seat on the Board at some future time, 
hoping to make a further constructive contribution to the work of the Agency. 
174. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) thanked the Iranian representative and his 
delegation for their kind gesture, which reflected the spirit of co-operation and consensus 
which prevailed within the Middle East and South Asia group. The two delegations directly 
concerned believed that a seat on the governing body of an international organization meant 
an opportunity to serve that organization, and the Islamic Republic of Iran had a good record 
in that respect. 
175. Lebanon was rising again, like the phoenix, to resume its position in regional and 
international affairs, and it would make every effort, within the framework of its regional 
group and in co-operation with other groups, to support the activities of the Agency. 
176. The PRESIDENT, commending the spirit of co-operation and understanding 
demonstrated by the two previous speakers, said he assumed that the Conference wished to 
elect Lebanon to the seat for the Middle East and South Asia. 
177. Lebanon was duly elected. 
The meeting rose at 1.35 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
5 January 1994 


GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 
Original: FRENCH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTIETH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 30 September 1993, at 3.10 p.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

8 General debate and annual report for 1992 (resumed) 1 - 142 

Statements by the delegates of the following States: 

Ghana 5- 19 
Ecuador 20-26 
Guatemala 27-31 
Mongolia 32-39 
Namibia 40-48 
Kenya 49-57 
Iraq 58-68 
Czech Republic 69-79 
Peru 80-88 
Ethiopia 89-97 
Slovenia 98 - 108 
Paraguay 109- 118 
United Republic of Tanzania 119- 126 
Afghanistan 127 - 138 
Armenia 139 - 142 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-03882 (IV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


ASSET 
DPRK 
ELISA 
FAO 
ILO 
INSAG 
INSARR 
IPERS 
LDC 
NEA 
NPT 
NUSS 
NUSSAG 
OECD 
OPANAL 


OSART 
PAHO 
RCA 


SAGSI 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNEP 
WATRP 
WHO 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
International Labour Organisation 
International Nuclear Safety Advisory Group 
Integrated Safety Assessment of Research Reactors 
International Peer Review Service 
Least developed country 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear Safety Standards 
Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory Group 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Pan American Health Organization 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
United Nations Environment Programme 
Waste Management Assessment and Technical Review Programme 
World Health Organization 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1992 (GC(XXXVII)/1060) (resumed) 


1. Mr. LI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea), exercising his right of reply, 
said that the accusations made by some delegates against his country were groundless and 
that his delegation regretted the fact that certain countries used the General Conference to 
bring political pressure to bear on the DPRK. If the nuclear issue which had arisen in 
respect of the DPRK was to be resolved smoothly, the question of the Secretariat's partiality 
would first have to be tackled. 
2. The responsibility for the non-implementation of the safeguards agreement between 
his country and the Agency lay with certain Secretariat officials who were being manipulated 
by a Superpower which was seeking to strangle his country's socialist system, using the 
agreement in order to gain access to military installations in th DPRK. His country rejected 
any attempt to carry out inspections on the basis of fabricated intelligence information 
provided by a third country. 
3. The DPRK had spared no effort to obtain a negotiated resolution of the nuclear 
question, even after its decision to withdraw from the NPT in the interests of the country's 
sovereignty and security. In order to settle the nuclear issue, his country had held talks with 
the United States, the relevant party, and also consultations with the Agency's Secretariat. 
Despite his country's sincere efforts to reach a negotiated solution, certain Secretariat 
officials and certain countries were trying to settle the matter by resorting to pressure. 
4. Owing to the adoption, at the Board's last meeting, of a "resolution" directed against 
his country, it would be impossible to hold the DPRK/Agency consultations which were to 
have taken place early in October. It was very clear, therefore, that pressure would not 
solve the nuclear issue. 
5. Mr. AMOO-GOTTFRIED (Ghana) said that his country, observing with 
increasing trepidation the incidence and escalation of conflicts in the former Yugoslavia, 
Azerbaijan, Georgia, Angola and Somalia, as well as the resultant atrocities and appalling 
human suffering, was somewhat reassured to note that measures were being taken to control 
the spread of nuclear weapons. Against that background, it was necessary to strengthen 
those measures and ensure strict compliance. The importance of the Agency's activities 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 


page 4 


directed towards ensuring that atomic energy was used for peaceful purposes only could not 
be overemphasized. In that connection, Ghana attached great significance to the preparations 
for the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference and hoped that by 1995 further 
countries would have acceded to the NPT. The accession of further countries was essential, 
particularly that of countries which had demonstrated a capacity for becoming advanced in 
nuclear technology. Also, it was highly desirable that they make their nuclear facilities 
available for inspection. The safeguarding of such facilities was a collective responsibility 
of the international community. Ghana had noted with interest the understanding reached 
between the leaders of Russia and Ukraine on the transfer and dismantling of nuclear 
weapons located on Ukrainian territory. Any accord which promoted the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons deserved the support and encouragement of all. 

6. The Agency's efforts to promote constructive uses of nuclear technology were highly 
beneficial to a developing country like Ghana, whose economic and social problems were 
compelling it to explore all possible ways of making progress. At the same time, the 
Ghanaian Government wished to support efforts directed towards the containment and 
ultimate dismantling of weapons of mass destruction. 
7. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities in Ghana, 
the use of nuclear technology in medicine and progress made in food irradiation deserved 
special mention. Ghana's pilot-scale gamma irradiation facility for food preservation and 
medical sterilization was nearing completion and was expected to be commissioned in 
April 1994. 
8. The programme for the education and training in radiological protection and nuclear 
safety of personnel employed at that type of facility was highly opportune. It was through 
such education that public apprehension over the use of advanced food preservation methods 
could be overcome. Furthermore, without such training programmes, developing countries 
like Ghana could not hope to sustain their facilities or derive maximum benefit from the 
services which they offered. 
9. The Ghanaian Government, in endeavouring to improve medical services and health 
delivery systems, had given priority to the establishment of a radiotherapy centre to provide 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 5 


therapy for cancer-related diseases, and it was optimistic that, when in operation, that model 
integrated facility for nuclear medicine and radiotherapy, established with Agency assistance, 
would serve the needs not only of the Ghanaian people, who at present had to travel overseas 
at great expense for treatment at similar facilities, but of Ghana's neighbours as well. The 
long-term impact of a successful model project would be immense, for the project would 
contribute to a much-needed expansion of nuclear medicine and radiotherapy service in 
Ghana and encourage other countries in the region to adopt the same approach. In that 
connection, the Agency's expertise, support and assistance were crucial. 

10. While appreciating the positive uses of nuclear technology, his Government was 
conscious of the need for strict adherence to radiological protection requirements by users 
of ionizing radiation. It had for that reason promulgated a Radiation Protection Law in 
January 1993. Subsequently, the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission had established a 
Radiation Protection Board, to be responsible for issuing operating licences for radiation 
facilities. In the practical application of nuclear technology, it was essential that safety not 
be sacrificed to expediency. 
11. The Ghana Atomic Energy Commission had also established an Institute of 
Biotechnology and Nuclear Agriculture as a result of the upgrading of the National Nuclear 
Research Institute's Department of Biology, Food and Agriculture. The aim was to promote 
the use of techniques such as mutation breeding, in vitro tissue culture techniques and the 
sterile-insect technique and thereby to improve the production and protection of food crops 
and livestock for the advancement of agro-based industries. 
12. A Centre for Advanced Digital Nuclear Electronics was being set up to provide 
training in nuclear instrumentation and computer interfacing. When operational, the Centre 
should also serve the sub-region. An atomic absorption spectrometer had been installed and 
would be used in studying environmental pollution problems and for the analysis of mineral 
ores for the mining companies in Ghana. It would enable the country to save the foreign 
exchange now being paid by mining companies for mineral ore analyses in European 
countries. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 6 


13. A radiopharmacy laboratory was being installed in the Chemistry Department as part 
of Agency technical co-operation project GHA/6/008. When completed, it would, among 
other things, serve as the country's sole source of the radiopharmaceutical kits, which were 
currently being imported at great expense for use in the Nuclear Medicine Unit at Korle Bu 
Teaching Hospital. The laboratory would enable the hospital to expand its diagnostic 
services, which in the long run would improve the provision of health care to all. 
14. Ghana had been a Member of the Agency for over 30 years and had made its modest 
contribution to the successes achieved. Its Conference Centre and related facilities were 
regularly placed at the disposal of the Agency for regional training courses and Agency 
activities on favourable terms, and they would continue to be made available whenever 
required. During the past year, the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission had hosted three 
Agency courses - one for radiation protection officers, one on food irradiation and one on 
radioimmunoassay in veterinary services. 
15. The Director General and his staff were to be commended for their efforts and the 
appreciable results they had achieved despite budgetary constraints and limited resources. 
16. The Agency's Regular Budget for 1994 again represented zero real growth. Given 
the increasing demands and challenges of a changing world, the General Conference should 
consider very carefully how the zero-real-growth principle was being applied, with a view 
to increasing the support provided to Member States, and particularly the developing 
countries among them. 
17. The Director General, in his statement, had emphasized the importance of the 
advanced and highly specialized training provided through the International Centre of 
Theoretical Physics in Trieste with Agency support. That support, for which the Agency was 
to be commended, had enabled the Centre, under the dynamic leadership of Professor Abdul 
Salam, to train many scientists from the developing countries. It was to be hoped that the 
Centre would continue to be a centre of excellence and receive maximum support from the 
Agency. 
18. Almost a decade had elapsed since the world had been brought back from the brink 
of self-destruction to which it had been propelled by the arms race. That event should now 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 7 


be translated into practical actions whereby governments were persuaded not to amass 
military forces in an attempt to achieve parity with or ascendancy over perceived or potential 
antagonists. The issue could not be ignored if tension was to be defused in certain areas of 
the world. Confidence-building measures should be taken so that neighbouring States or 
protagonists might co-exist in peace. It was impossible to operate in a void. Following the 
removal of one deterrent, effective proposals should be made for partly assuaging the 
legitimate desire for self-preservation and reducing the propensity towards excessive military 
mobilization. That might enable progress to be made towards the nuclear-weapon-free world 
to which everyone aspired. 

19. With that ideal in view, Ghana reiterated its commitment to the denuclearization of 
Africa. It shared the optimism of other African countries which had indicated that, with the 
process of verification in South Africa initiated and the Middle East pursuing similar 
objectives, the time was ripe for the attainment of that goal. To that end, and for the 
fulfilment of the Agency's mandate to promote the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, 
Ghana intended to maintain its co-operation and full support. 
20. Mr. DURAN ABAD (Ecuador) conveyed the greetings of the President of his 
country, Mr. Duran Ballen, to the General Conference and commended the Agency on its 
work to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which were of great benefit to Ecuador 
and to mankind as a whole. 
21. Ecuador, which was convinced that peace was one of the most precious possessions 
of mankind, fully approved of and took great interest in the work done by the Agency in 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in negotiating and implementing 
agreements on safeguards designed to prevent the use of nuclear material for military 
purposes. His delegation therefore welcomed the new safeguards agreements being 
negotiated between the Agency and Member States and hoped that the Agency would 
continue to fulfil its mandate. 
22. In that connection, as a member of the Board of Governors, Ecuador was concerned 
about the difficulties encountered in implementing the safeguards agreement concluded 
between the Agency and the DPRK. It appealed to all States to co-operate with the Agency, 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 8 


to remain open to dialogue and to provide the assistance required in order to ensure the 
necessary transparency and to lay the foundations for gradual global denuclearization. 


23. The Ecuadorian delegation was pleased to note that South Africa was co-operating 
with the Agency in all activities taking place in its territory, and it wished to support any 
measure designed to bring about the denuclearization of the African continent. As far as 
Latin America was concerned, his country approved of the support given to the Tlatelolco 
Treaty and appealed to those countries of the former Soviet Union which possessed nuclear 
weapons to accede to Protocol II of that Treaty. 
24. Noting that his delegation had been following with great interest the measures taken 
to promote technical co-operation, he said that Ecuador was mindful of the need to achieve 
a balance between the main activities of the Agency, which included technical assistance, the 
activity from which Ecuador derived the greatest benefit. Technical co-operation in the 
region of Latin America and the Caribbean had declined slightly in 1992 in percentage terms, 
but he hoped that that was a temporary phenomenon which did not reflect a long-term trend. 
Technical co-operation was of considerable benefit to the process of development in Ecuador 
which, during recent years, had participated in the technical co-operation activities of the 
Agency in various areas, ranging from agriculture to radiological protection, with excellent 
practical results. Similarly, the important activities of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy 
Commission had benefited from the services of experts provided and training activities 
organized by the Agency. 
25. The Ecuadorian Government supported the activities of ARCAL, for it was convinced 
that they would make possible a real transfer of technology, thanks in particular to model 
projects, which were potentially of major immediate practical relevance in regions or areas 
with relatively homogeneous characteristics. 
26. During the coming year, Ecuador would follow the activities of the Agency closely. 
It would participate in its discussions and continue helping the Agency to fulfil its statutory 
obligations. Indeed, his country was convinced that universal support for the Agency was 
essential if some of the obstacles to the safety and prosperity of mankind and of future 
generations were to be overcome. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 360 
page 9 


27. Mr. JUAREZ TOLEDO (Guatemala), recalling that his country had had the 
honour of being the first to deposit its instrument of ratification of the Agency's Statute in 
Washington D.C., on 29 March 1957, said that had certainly been a sound decision, for the 
period of the Agency's existence had been a time of rapid growth in nuclear science and 
technology applied to development and in control over that source of energy in all fields. 
28. Guatemala set great store by the application of nuclear techniques in its development 
programme, particularly in sectors where resources were scarce - such as health services and 
agriculture - and in industry, where it was beginning to make use of nuclear techniques to 
enhance the level of quality assurance. It was also conducting projects for the radiological 
protection of workers, the environment and the public and, although some delays had 
occurred in that area, it was planned to press on in 1994 with setting up an infrastructure. 
29. His country was also participating actively in ARCAL projects, whose results were 
being used by Guatemalan institutions, and in numerous exchanges of experience with other 
countries of the region. Wishing to strengthen its support for ARCAL, Guatemala would like 
to continue hosting courses, to receive fellowship holders and technical experts, and to 
participate in exchanges of scientific and technical experience conducive to the development 
of Latin America. 
30. In its desire to protect the environment, his Government, under Mr. Leon Carpio, had 
brought into force regulations for licensing the use of radioisotopes and ionizing radiation, 
starting with the handling and final disposition of radioactive wastes, the qualifications of 
operators and the handling of radioactive substances. Guatemala hoped that nuclear 
technology would soon play a more prominent role in combating pollution, and in that 
connection it would like to contribute to the activities of the countries of the region by 
placing at their disposal those of its installations where relevant analyses had been performed. 
31. With regard to technical co-operation in general, the Guatemalan delegation hoped 
that the resources of the Agency would enable it to respond positively to as many requests 
as possible from countries which had the greatest needs. In that regard, he particularly 
thanked those countries which were supporting the projects being implemented in Guatemala 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 10 


and also the technical and administrative staff of the Agency, who remained ready at all 
times to promote the success of Guatemalan nuclear activities. 


32. Mr. YUMJAV (Mongolia) said that many important events had occurred since 
the previous session of the General Conference. In particular, the number of States party to 
the NPT had reached 160, including all the nuclear-weapon States. He welcomed the new 
States party to the NPT, which was the cornerstone of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
He hoped that the NPT Review and Extension Conference of 1995 would provide a forum 
for addressing all problems and strengthening that regime. Mongolia was in favour of an 
indefinite extension of the NPT. 
33. The Agency's safeguards system was one of the principal means of ensuring the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons, and Mongolia was in favour of strengthening the effectiveness 
and improving the efficiency of that system. In the same spirit, it would like to see a 
comprehensive nuclear test ban and welcomed the fact that the Governments of the Russian 
Federation, the United States of America and France had decided to extend their moratoria 
on nuclear testing. The Conference on Disarmament had given its Ad Hoc Committee on 
a Nuclear Test Ban a mandate to begin negotiations on a comprehensive test ban treaty; the 
extension of the moratoria and the opening of those negotiations would create a favourable 
climate for the NPT Review and Extension Conference. 
34. The Agency initiatives aimed at strengthening international co-operation in nuclear 
safety and radiological protection and promoting the establishment of a universal nuclear 
safety regime were very timely, and he welcomed the progress made in the elaboration of 
a nuclear safety convention; he was convinced that the adoption of such a convention would 
further strengthen the nuclear safety regime at the international level. 
35. Mongolia was satisfied with the Agency's annual report for 1992 and supported the 
recommendations of the Board of Governors concerning the Agency's programme and budget 
and the TACF target for 1994. 
36. Mongolia had been a member of the Agency for 20 years, during which time his 
country had achieved some success in the use of nuclear techniques, which were being used 
widely in industry, agriculture, medicine, hydrology and environmental protection. In recent 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 360 
page 11 


years, co-operation between Mongolia and the Agency had been expanding: in that context, 
national courses and seminars had been held in Mongolia on radiation protection and safety 
infrastructure, nuclear spectrometry and other topics. Mongolian specialists had taken part 
in international and regional seminars and training courses held under the auspices of the 
Agency and had benefited from scientific visits. The Agency had provided Mongolia with 
many important expert services. 

37. In addition, Mongolia had acceded to the RCA, which had become a valuable tool in 
the transfer of nuclear technology to the countries of Asia. His country had begun to 
participate in RCA activities, attending meetings of representatives of RCA member 
countries, and it intended to become still more closely involved. 
38. The Agency's technical co-operation programme for Mongolia covered many fields, 
including the upgrading of the national information system, the development of nuclear 
analytical facilities for the analysis of coal, mineral and ore samples, the use of nuclear 
techniques in agriculture, nuclear medicine, radiation protection and hydrology, and the 
establishment of a radiobiology laboratory. The Agency was also assisting in establishing 
gamma radiography and radiochemistry teaching laboratories and in the assessment of 
Mongolia's uranium potential. For the next biennial programme (1995-96), the nine project 
proposals to be submitted would relate to priority areas of particular importance for the 
development of the country during the present difficult period of transition. 
39. A country programme review team consisting of four Agency experts had visited 
Mongolia in May 1992. After making an in-depth review of past and present technical cooperation 
programmes in Mongolia, the team had identified priority areas; its valuable 
recommendations had been reflected in the 1993-94 technical co-operation programmes and 
in the new requests for the period 1995-96. 
40. Ms. SCHWIMMING-CHASE (Namibia) said that, following the end of the 
Cold War, the General Conference was meeting in an atmosphere of hope as efforts were 
made to find peaceful solutions to conflicts which had been raging for decades. Namibia 
hoped that those efforts would be successful. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 360 
page 12 


41. Namibia appreciated the Agency's role in helping to curb the proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and in promoting nuclear safety and the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. It was 
indebted to the Agency for technical assistance relating to public health, agriculture and 
veterinary services and for having sent an expert team to evaluate radiological safety at the 
Rossing uranium mine. The Namibian Government had studied the team's findings and 
recommendations carefully and had already implemented some of the recommendations. 
Namibia was still benefiting from the Agency's technical co-operation programme, under 
which an expert was currently helping to establish a radiation protection infrastructure to be 
administered by the Ministry of Health and Social Services. 
42. Like most of the countries of Southern Africa, Namibia was facing a severe problem 
in ensuring the proper treatment of cancer, owing to the non-availability of radiotherapy 
services. With a view to setting up such services, it had been having fruitful discussions, 
and it had been assured that the Agency would assist it. 
43. Namibia had already acceded to the NPT and hoped that that augured well for the 
creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. The mutual trust provided by the 
safeguards system of the Agency was clearly central to the international non-proliferation 
regime. She was therefore pleased to announce that Namibia would very shortly be 
concluding a safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
44. As most of Namibia was arid, her Government was faced with severe water supply 
problems. It therefore planned to use radioactive tracer techniques in locating and exploiting 
water resources and would very shortly be submitting a project proposal in that connection. 
45. Everyone was aware of the changes taking place in South Africa and had taken note 
of that country's announcement that it had voluntarily abandoned its nuclear deterrent 
capability before accession to the NPT and of its standing invitation to the Agency to inspect 
its past nuclear weapons programme and facilities and to verify the completeness of its 
disclosure. Despite those changes, it was important for the international community to 
monitor the situation very closely and to maintain pressure whenever necessary until the new, 
democratic Government was in place. The latest decisions taken by South Africa gave 

GC(XXXVII)/OR. 360 
page 13 


grounds for hope that that would happen in the very near future, enabling the sub-continent 
to advance further on the road to peace, co-operation and development. 

46. However, the alarming situation in Angola remained a major obstacle. It was a 
matter of grave concern that the immense human tragedy in Angola was steadily deepening, 
virtually unnoticed by the world at large because neither newspapers nor television referred 
to it. The international community should put more pressure on Dr. Jonas Savimbi, the 
leader of UNITA, and force him to respect the 1991 accords between his movement and the 
Angolan Government, thereby ending the long civil war and bringing peace to Angola. 
47. Namibia endorsed the Agency's programme and budget for 1994 and hoped that all 
Member States would pay their assessed contributions on time. 
48. In conclusion, Namibia gave its assurance that it was fully committed to the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy for the benefit of the world and for future generations. 
49. Mr. OLEMBO (Kenya) extended his sincere thanks to the Agency for its 
tireless efforts, under the Statute, to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to enforce 
safeguards and to minimize risks to life, health and the environment. In that connection, he 
commended the Director General on the measures he had taken to enhance the efficiency and 
improve the effectiveness of the safeguards system. He supported SAGSI's proposals for an 
alternative safeguards regime and a re-examination of the implementation processes. He 
commended the Director General and his staff on the way in which they were meeting the 
challenges posed by the increased activities in those areas, upon which the success of the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear technology was dependent. 
50. Kenya set great store by the Agency's technical co-operation activities. Many 
developing countries, including Kenya, were facing numerous problems in their social and 
economic development. The technical gap between the developing countries, particularly 
those in Africa, and the developed countries was increasing every year. Certain problems 
were due to global events beyond the control of the developing countries, although the events 
in question controlled the rate at which those countries developed. The challenge facing the 
Agency was to expedite their development through the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 14 


51. Over the past decade, numerous projects had been undertaken and completed in Kenya 
with the assistance of the Agency, many of them having a considerable impact in various 
areas of Kenya's development. For example, the Radiation Protection Service, which had 
benefited from Agency technical assistance, was fully operational and now attracted 
maximum support from the Government. Other developing countries with plans for 
establishing a radiation protection service could learn from the Kenyan success story. In 
addition, the Nuclear Science Centre, established with the assistance of the Agency, 
continued to provide services in instrument maintenance, quality control and the application 
of nuclear analytical techniques. It also participated in regional training activities and 
sometimes provided the necessary lecturers. In human health, diagnosis and treatment of 
thyroid disorders, which were common in some areas of the country, had been promoted 
through the ongoing project for the establishment of a radioimmunoassay laboratory at 
Kenya's national teaching hospital. Also, the Agency had helped to establish a radiotherapy 
service for cervical and oesophageal cancers, which were unfortunately not uncommon in 
Kenya, and had provided a gamma camera in that connection. 
52. Kenya considered agriculture to be the mainstay of its economy, and the Agency had 
provided technical assistance in that vital area. It was expected that three current projects on 
the use of isotope techniques in improving the efficiency of fertilizer use, in improving 
the productivity of dairy cattle and in studying nitrogen fixation by multipurpose tree 
species - would ultimately be of benefit to small-scale farmers. 
53. Kenya was grateful to the Agency for having given it the opportunity in 1993 to host 
several activities in its territory. For example, the co-ordinators of the AFRA regional 
project on irradiation processing had met in Nairobi in March. The fourth technical working 
group meeting for AFRA had taken place in Nairobi during the same period, in the presence 
of the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation. On that occasion, Kenya had 
been elected Chairman of AFRA for a year, which it considered a great honour. 
54. The IAEA/UNEP Seminar for Africa, Europe, the Middle East and the Mediterranean 
on Radiobiological Techniques in the Comparative Estimation of Carcinogenic Induction by 
Chemical Pollutants and Low-dose Radiation was expected to take place in November in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 15 


Nairobi, together with regional seminars on radioactive waste management and nondestructive 
testing. 

55. The recent visit of the Director General, and that of the Deputy Director General for 
Technical Co-operation already mentioned, had helped to enhance public awareness of the 
great contribution which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy could make towards solving 
Kenya's socio-economic problems. The implementation of the Agency's projects in Africa 
would be impossible without a programme of fellowships, and in that connection Kenya was 
grateful for the commitment and competence of the Fellowships and Training Section of the 
Division of Technical Co-operation Implementation. It was also grateful to the Governments 
of the United States, the United Kingdom, France, Spain, Italy, South Africa and other 
countries which had continued to provide the financial resources and technical assistance 
which were required for the implementation of certain projects and to the Governments of 
Spain, France, South Africa, Egypt and other donor countries which had provided financial 
and logistic support to AFRA. 
56. Kenya noted with satisfaction that the number of women in the Professional category 
serving in the Agency's Secretariat had increased slightly during the past three years, from 
13 % to 15 %. While welcoming the increase, he nevertheless considered that the process was 
a slow one, falling well short of the objectives set by resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/599. At 
a time when many countries were making unprecedented progress towards democracy, 
inhuman regimes were being dismantled and human rights were being supported throughout 
the world, the picture was not as positive with regard to the status of women. Improvements 
in the status of women at all levels were necessary, and concerted efforts should be made to 
that end. The delegation of Kenya supported draft resolution Gc(xxxvn)/COM.5/132/Rev.i 
submitted by the United States of America, in which the Director General was requested to 
consider and implement recommendations aimed at improving the representation of women 
in the Secretariat. His delegation looked forward to the time when the representation of 
women in the Secretariat would not only be much greater, but also reflect the necessary 
diversity of nationalities. 
57. The peaceful uses of nuclear technology could help a great deal in solving the 
problems of mankind, but for that to happen there was a need for greater public awareness 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 16 


achieved through education - about, inter alia, the safety of nuclear technology applications, 
waste management, nuclear power as an alternative energy source and environmental 
protection. That was especially so at a time when environmental issues were coming to the 
fore in development programmes following the adoption of Agenda 21 at the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. The 
challenges ahead were enormous. 

58. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that objectivity and transparency should be the rule 
and that the real interests of Member States should be paramount: efforts to politicize the 
Agency and make it depart from its technical mandate could have serious consequences in 
the short and the long term. 
59. Depriving Iraq of its voting rights was proof that political motives had prevailed over 
legal principles and the supreme interests of the Agency and its Member States. 
60. Iraq was unable to pay its Regular Budget contributions because of the embargo 
imposed on it by the Security Council. It had requested the United Nations Secretary-
General to arrange for $200 000 to be released from Iraqi accounts so as to enable it to pay 
its debts to the United Nations and the specialized agencies. The request had been rejected 
on the pretext that Security Council resolutions 661 and 778 did not provide for blocked Iraqi 
accounts to be drawn on for contributions to international organizations. Iraq had proposed 
other solutions which had likewise been rejected. The General Conference could have 
resolved the problem by applying the provisions of the second sentence of Article XIX. A of 
the Statute, under which the Conference could permit a Member State to participate in votes 
if it was satisfied that the State's failure to pay its financial contributions to the Agency was 
due to conditions beyond its control. 
61. The Director General had confirmed in his latest statement to the Board of Governors 
and in his statement to the General Conference that the Agency's inspection team had 
completed the mapping of Iraq's nuclear programme and was about to start with long-term 
monitoring. The Agency had thus completed the basic tasks assigned to it in resolution 687, 
which it clearly could not have done without the full collaboration of the Iraqi authorities. 
Nevertheless, a number of speakers had insisted on ignoring the facts and had made 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 17 


statements about Iraq which had been inaccurate and lacking in objectivity, despite reports 
of the inspection team and statements of the Director General showing that the Agency had 
achieved its basic objectives and that the question of certain information about Iraq's nuclear 
programme would soon be settled. 


62. In that connection, he referred to a statement by the head of the Agency inspection 
team to the effect that Iraq's nuclear programme was "at zero" and to a statement by the 
assistant head of the team to the effect that Iraq's nuclear programme had been in its early 
stages. Those statements, in his view, proved the falseness of all the accusations made 
against Iraq and its nuclear programme. 
63. It was more than a year since the Agency inspection team had produced its last 
diagram illustrating the Iraqi nuclear programme, and since then the Agency had received 
no information contradicting the documents provided by Iraq. 
64. Iraq had taken the initiative in proposing a constructive dialogue with the Security 
Council and the Special Commission on all questions arising from the implementation of 
resolution 687 and on the modalities of a long-term monitoring programme, so as to remove 
all ambiguities and define the responsibilities of all parties. 
65. The Security Council had agreed to the proposal, and high-level technical discussions 
had taken place at the beginning of September. The report on those discussions reflected 
their positive nature. 
66. Referring to Annex 1 to the report, he said that Iraq was committed to producing 
satisfactory replies to the Agency's questions about suppliers and purchases at high-level 
technical discussions due to take place in Baghdad at the beginning of October. The General 
Conference should acknowledge the progress made, which showed that Iraq, the Special 
Commission and the Agency inspection team were sparing no effort to complete the 
implementation of resolution 687 and to have the long-term monitoring programme in place 
as soon as possible. 
67. Those who were still attacking Iraq were doing so for political motives which clouded 
their judgement and led them to concoct justifications for maintaining the financial embargo 
responsible for the death of hundreds of thousands of Iraqi people. Iraq had fulfilled all its 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 18 


obligations under resolution 687, had undertaken to provide answers to the questions still 
outstanding and had declared that it was ready to take the technical measures necessary for 
facilitating future inspections. He hoped that, in return, the Security Council would lift the 
embargo it had imposed, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 22 of 
resolution 687. 


68. In connection with that resolution, he drew attention to paragraph 14, in accordance 
with which the actions to be taken by Iraq in paragraphs 8 to 13 of the resolution represented 
steps towards the goal of establishing in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass 
destruction. He was surprised that those who had spoken about Iraq had not mentioned that 
paragraph and had not called upon all the States in the Middle East to take serious measures 
aimed at the establishment of such a zone - that they had not called upon Israel to give up 
its nuclear weapons, those States in the Middle East which had weapons of mass destruction 
to get rid of them and all the other Middle East States to refrain from purchasing and 
manufacturing any weapons of mass destruction. 
69. Mr. STULLER (Czech Republic) said that his country regarded the Agency 
as one of the most important organizations with the United Nations system and greatly 
appreciated the contribution which it was making to peace and international understanding 
by promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and applying safeguards designed to 
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The Czech Republic was convinced that, in 
the post-Cold War era, strict observance of the NPT's provisions was more important than 
ever. Accordingly, it strongly supported the unconditional and indefinite extension of the 
NPT and was opposed to any action likely to result in withdrawal from the Treaty and the 
Agency's safeguards system. 
70. When applying for membership of the Agency at the beginning of the year, the Czech 
Republic had emphasized its readiness to meet all commitments and agreements entered into 
by the former Czechoslovakia. It had immediately accepted the NPT, had confirmed that it 
would succeed to the former Czechoslovakia's NPT safeguards agreement with the Agency 
and had become a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group. It fully respected the Agency's 
safeguards being applied in accordance with the guidelines laid down in document 
INFCIRC/153. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 19 


71. The Czech Republic had also confirmed its succession to the Convention on the 
Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. 
72. His country greatly appreciated the Secretariat's helpful attitude during 1993, which 
had enabled it to take part in all of the Agency's activities, including technical assistance 
programmes and extrabudgetary projects. In that context, he recalled that the Czech 
Republic had continued to participate in the Incident Reporting System, accepted the 
International Nuclear Event Scale and was playing an active role in safety-related activities 
such as the OSART and ASSET programmes and the Waste Management Assessment and 
Technical Review Programme (WATRP). 
73. Aware of the need to ensure continuous State supervision in the nuclear energy area, 
at the end of 1992 the Czech Republic had established, before the splitting-up of the 
Federation, the State Office for Nuclear Safety as a new, independent regulatory authority. 
Since 1 January 1993, the Office had been fulfilling all the functions and performing all the 
regulatory duties associated with the State supervision of nuclear safety and safeguards and 
ensuring co-operation with the Agency and the fulfilment of all the Czech Republic's 
international commitments in the field of nuclear safety. Its regulatory activities were based 
on the NUSS programme recommendations and on the recommendations of INSAG and 
NUSSAG. 
74. Nuclear power in the Czech Republic was a reality, with four WWER-440/213 units 
at Dukovany constituting a stable and reliable source of electricity which was well accepted 
by the public. The country's installed nuclear capacity, at 1760 MW, was relatively low 
compared with the total capacity of its coal-fired plants - 9362 MW. 
75. The need to reduce coal-burning, which was especially harmful for the environment 
as the Czech Republic's coal was of poor quality, remained one of the main reasons for 
introducing nuclear power, which was the most suitable alternative. Even after the political 
changes in late 1989, the orientation of the nuclear power programme had remained 
unchanged. The construction of Units 1 and 2 at Temelin, which was well advanced, had 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 20 


continued, the safety systems being modernized with the help of Western technology 
(construction of Units 3 and 4 had been halted), and Western organizations and suppliers had 
been invited to co-operate throughout the nuclear power sector. The decision to complete 
the construction of the Temelin nuclear power plant had been taken on the basis of an energy 
policy which envisaged 2000 MW of new nuclear capacity in order to create the conditions 
necessary for the country's economic development and, at the same time, replace old coalfired 
plants in the most effective and environmentally benign way. It was important that the 
Temilin nuclear power plant should be licensable on the basis of worldwide safety criteria. 

76. In the past the Czech Republic had been a recipient of Soviet reactor technology. 
However, the contribution made by its own industry had been far from negligible, which had 
allowed it a certain independence in formulating national laws and regulations based to a 
great extent on Agency recommendations, particularly in the area of nuclear safety. A 
review of the country's legislation had shown that, while the nuclear safety area was 
sufficiently covered, there were some gaps in other areas. The Czech Government had 
therefore called for the drafting of a general law on the utilization of nuclear energy, with 
provisions concerning nuclear damage liability and insurance, a spent fuel management and 
disposal programme, and a public information policy in the nuclear field. The necessary 
work was under way, on the basis of Agency recommendations and in due course - it was 
to be hoped - with direct Agency assistance. 
77. Turning to nuclear safety, which was of vital importance for the Czech Republic, he 
said that resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/582 adopted by the General Conference in 1992 was 
highly relevant to the upgrading of his country's reactors. His delegation welcomed the 
progress made in implementing that resolution, particularly with regard to the drafting of a 
nuclear safety convention, and the excellent performance of the Agency's safety services. 
However, the activities of greatest importance for the Czech Republic were those related to 
the safety of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe, as described in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1064. Although significant progress had been made, his delegation considered 
that, because of the urgency of the matter, better co-ordination was necessary - and it 
believed that better co-ordination could be achieved. His delegation hoped that, through 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 21 


discussions in the Committee of the Whole, it would be possible to agree on the most suitable 
means of meeting what was a very urgent need. 


78. As to safeguards, it was not necessary to repeat all the reasons for resolution 
GC(XXXVI)/RES/586 entitled "Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency 
of the safeguards system". His delegation had followed with great interest all the 
developments in that area, particularly in SAGSI and the Board of Governors. Although it 
had noted substantial progress, his delegation considered - as representatives of the former 
Czechoslovakia had stated several times in the past - that the strengthening of safeguards 
should be based on the introduction of an integrated safeguards system combining in optimum 
fashion all the elements of existing accounting systems with the supplementary measures 
introduced in the previous two years. In his delegation's view, the Secretariat should lose 
no time in evaluating such an integrated system, with necessary field trials. The Secretariat 
was welcome to perform a field trial in the Czech Republic, and his authorities were ready 
to discuss the details with the Secretariat. 
79. The readiness of the Czech Republic to assist the Agency was not limited to that 
offer. For example, his delegation hoped that Agency training courses, conferences and 
symposia would continue to be held in the Czech Republic, which was very close to the 
Headquarters of the Agency and had an excellent tradition in such matters. 
80. Mr. VELASQUEZ-RODRIGUEZ (Peru) said that the Agency's role in the 
transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes to developing countries was of great 
importance for the well-being of those countries and for peace in general. In most cases, the 
absence of peace was due to economic and social problems resulting from technological 
imbalance. Peru was glad therefore that, in pursuit of its statutory objectives, the Agency 
had regularly, since 1958, provided it with assistance in the application of nuclear techniques 
in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
81. Peru was currently undergoing structural reform to bring it into line with the 
contemporary international system. The present Government had made serious efforts to 
bring peace to the country, by fighting terrorism and drug trafficking, which, through their 
extent and the links between them, constituted a national menace. Concurrently, it had 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 22 


pursued policies of economic adjustment which had enabled it to regain the confidence of the 
international financial system. Macroeconomic indicators showed clearly that the 
reinstatement of the Peruvian economy in the world market was producing its first fruits. 
The recovery had enabled the Government to settle its arrears of contributions for past years. 


82. At the international level, he was pleased that the Governments of a number of 
nuclear-weapon States had decided on a moratorium on nuclear tests, with a view to an 
ultimate agreement on the total cessation of tests. He appealed to the nuclear-weapon States 
which had not yet taken that decision to take it without delay. 

83. The numerous applications for membership of the Agency were yet another proof of 
the wish of the international community to create a nuclear-weapon-free world. His 
delegation was confident that, in co-operation with its Member States, the Agency would set 
up the necessary machinery for maintaining peace and international security. In that 
connection it was regrettable that certain countries had not yet concluded safeguards 
agreements with the Agency, and Peru appealed to them once again to demonstrate the 
political will to join the safeguards system and thus help to create the desired climate of 
international security. 
84. It was equally important to maintain a balance in financial terms between safeguards 
and promotional activities. The Peruvian Government therefore supported initiatives which 
sought to ensure reliable and adequate resources for the TACF. As a supporter of the use 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, Peru sought to encourage international co-operation 
in that field, and the election of a Peruvian national as head of the OP ANAL Secretariat for 
the period 1994-98 was a tribute to its commitment. 
85. Before commenting on his country's activities in the nuclear field, he pointed out that 
the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute was currently rationalizing its activities and improving 
the administration of its international co-operation programmes. 
86. The technical co-operation projects being carried out in Peru related to - inter alia the 
training of highly qualified personnel (for which the Agency was providing the services 
of high-level experts), the continuation of preliminary studies of the feasibility of introducing 
nuclear power in the long term, the installation of new facilities for neutron activation 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 23 


analysis (with extrabudgetary support from the United Kingdom and the United States of 
America for which Peru was very grateful), the production of radioisotopes and 
radiopharmaceuticals and - in agriculture - research on subjects ranging from plant 
improvement to animal nutrition and reproduction. 

87. Peru was experiencing difficulties with its food irradiation project, owing to policies 
for stabilizing the economy which should soon be resolved. In the field of nuclear safety and 
radiological protection, thanks to Agency technical assistance Peru now had highly qualified 
personnel and the means to cope with any nuclear emergency or accident. A modern 
laboratory for the radiation monitoring of occupationally exposed persons had also been set 
up within the framework of an Agency project. The tasks in that field were regulatory and 
legal as well as technical, and his delegation therefore welcomed the fact that the 
Conference's agenda included an item entitled "Measures to strengthen international cooperation 
in matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection". Faithful to its 
tradition of respect for international law, Peru reiterated its wish to accede to the Convention 
on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, the Convention on Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency. Peru was following with interest the work on drafting a nuclear 
safety convention and hoped that it would be completed in the near future. 
88. ARCAL was an excellent exercise in horizontal co-operation among countries of Latin 
America. He hoped that the work being done within the ARCAL framework would result 
in exchanges of experience and know-how which would promote Latin American progress 
in the nuclear field. 
89. Mr. YIMER (Ethiopia) recalled that Article II of the Statute, where the 
Agency's objectives were spelled out, provided that the Agency "shall seek to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world" and that it "shall ensure, so far as it is able, that assistance provided by it or at its 
request or under its supervision or control is not used in such a way as to further any 
military purpose". That evoked the two broad areas of Agency involvement - safeguards and 
non-safeguards activities. In pursuance of its objectives, in Article HI of its Statute the 
Agency was authorized, inter alia, to "encourage and assist research on, and development 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 24 


and practical application of, atomic energy for peaceful uses throughout the world" and to 
"make provision, in accordance with this Statute, for materials, services, equipment, and 
facilities to meet the needs of research on, and development and practical application of, 
atomic energy for peaceful purposes, including the production of electric power, with due 
consideration for the needs of the under-developed areas of the world". As stated in 
Article m.B.3, in carrying out its functions the Agency was required to allocate its resources 
"in such a manner as to secure efficient utilization and the greatest possible general benefit 
in all areas of the world, bearing in mind the special needs of the under-developed areas of 
the world". 

90. The importance of the Agency's activities for developing countries hardly needed to 
be emphasized. Since its inception, in 1957, the Agency had paid special attention to the 
needs of developing countries, as clearly required by its Statute. It went without saying that 
its activities in food and agriculture and human health were essential to meeting those needs. 
With regard to food and agriculture, the Agency had done commendable work in soil 
fertility, irrigation and crop production, plant breeding and genetics, animal production and 
health, insect and pest control, agrochemicals and residues, and food irradiation, particular 
emphasis being placed on the joint Agency/FAO programme of assistance to Member States 
in using nuclear techniques in agricultural research and development to improve food 
production, reduce losses and protect the environment. It was interesting to note in that 
connection that, as stated on page 50 of the annual report, increased emphasis had been 
placed on a project on the genetic improvement of basic food crops in Africa and that efforts 
would also concentrate on the domestication of local plant species as sources of food. In 
addition, his delegation noted with satisfaction that the programme to eradicate the tsetse fly 
from Zanzibar Island was progressing and that it promised to yield proven technologies for 
eradicating the vectors of African animal trypanosomiasis from many parts of Africa. His 
delegation believed that those and related activities in the area of food and agriculture would 
assist governments in their efforts to alleviate the most acute problem facing African 
countries - shortage of food. 
91. In the area of human health, his delegation attached great importance to the work 
being done in nuclear medicine, in applied radiation biology and radiotherapy and in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 25 


dosimetry and to the nutritional and health-related environmental studies being supported by 
the Agency. It noted with satisfaction the Agency's efforts to alleviate the difficulties 
encountered by developing countries in that critical area. It was entirely appropriate that, 
as indicated on page 69 of the annual report, the Agency should be addressing issues where 
nuclear techniques were especially efficient and cost effective in the prevention, diagnosis, 
prognosis and treatment of diseases, or in the analysis of health problems related to the 
environment such as pollution and the availability of nutrients, particular emphasis being 
placed, in co-operation with WHO, on techniques suitable for the study and management of 
communicable diseases, nutritional problems, and cancer, heart and brain diseases, all of 
which were rightly recognized by the Agency as being of special significance for developing 
countries. Also, it was noteworthy that in 1992 projects had continued to focus on 
strengthening indigenous skills and capabilities. 

92. His delegation appreciated the comprehensive and highly informative nature of the 
Director General's report on the Agency's technical co-operation activities in 1992. It was 
encouraging to see from the report that 231 of the 1094 projects operational in 1992 had been 
completed. 
93. Noting that Africa now accounted for the largest share of the Agency's technical cooperation 
programme, he said that the report had been right in pointing out that the emphasis 
on Africa was appropriate for the region with the largest number of LDCs - 13 of them 
Member States of the Agency - and urged the Agency to further intensify its efforts to 
increase the amount of technical assistance being provided to African countries. Besides 
helping individual countries to apply nuclear techniques in agriculture, public health and 
water resources development to establish radiation protection infrastructure and to engage in 
manpower development, the Agency should promote regional co-operation in the areas in 
question. In that connection, it was noteworthy that significant progress had been made 
towards closer co-operation among AFRA countries, which had become more aware of the 
potential benefits of regional co-operation. 
94. Ethiopia, which had been a Member of the Agency since its inception, in 1957, had 
co-operated closely with the Agency and had received technical assistance in various forms. 
Nevertheless, his country would like the co-operation to be even closer, with a view to the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 26 


enhancement of Ethiopia's ability to receive technical assistance. At a time when Ethiopia 
was engaged in a fundamental transformation of all sectors of national life, and particularly 
in economic reconstruction and development, it went without saying that assistance from the 
Agency, with special emphasis on the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, was 
essential to the success of its efforts. Ethiopia was therefore committed to working more 
closely with the Agency so as to benefit more from its assistance. To that end, in 
October 1992 it had opened a Permanent Mission in Vienna with the strengthening of 


co-operation with the Agency as one of its primary functions. 

95. In April, a visit of the Deputy Director General for Technical Co-operation to 
Ethiopia had provided an opportunity to exchange views on the needs and priorities of the 
country as regards Agency assistance. In Ethiopia, agricultural and hydrological applications 
of nuclear techniques offered important potential benefits. His country recognized that the 
practical feasibility of using nuclear techniques in the areas in question needed to be studied 
in depth and that projects should be carefully prepared. With a view to receiving increased 
assistance from the Agency, Ethiopia was about to promulgate a radiation protection law 
creating a separate Radiation Protection Authority under the Science and Technology 
Commission. 
96. With regard to regional co-operation in nuclear science and technology, Ethiopia had, 
in June, joined AFRA, which now had 16 members. Already ten AFRA projects had been 
initiated, most of them of potential interest to Ethiopia. His country hoped to contribute to 
the activities being conducted within the AFRA framework. 
97. In conclusion, he reiterated his country's commitment to the objectives of the Agency 
as laid down in the Statute and its readiness to co-operate closely with the Agency, 
particularly in endeavouring to enhance and expand technical assistance to developing 
countries. 
98. Mr. GREGORIC (Slovenia) said that Slovenia was a strong supporter of 
the NPT, to which it had acceded the previous year, and that it endorsed efforts to persuade 
countries which had not already done so to accede to the Treaty. Also, it supported the 
Board's efforts to improve the safeguards system through provisions regarding special 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 27 


inspections, the early provision of design information, access to additional information and 
universal reporting. In addition, it was in favour of an indefinite extension of the NPT. 


99. The cases of Iraq and the DPRK had demonstrated that the safeguards system required 
further improvement, and in that connection his country believed that a mechanism should 
be established for controlling nuclear material and technology and related dual-use items. 
Also, Slovenia supported all efforts directed towards a ban on all nuclear explosions. 
100. He commended the Agency on its role in the drafting of a nuclear safety convention, 
to which it attached great importance, and on its programmes for improving the safety of the 
nuclear power plants built to earlier safety standards. The nuclear safety convention should 
cover not only power reactors, but also nuclear facilities. If necessary, however, his country 
could go along with the gradual expansion of a convention initially limited to power reactors. 
It was to be hoped that the present draft text would be finalized early the following year. 
101. Paying tribute to the various international assistance efforts to improve nuclear power 
plant safety and strengthen nuclear regulatory infrastructures in the newly independent States 
of the former Soviet Union, he said that further co-ordinated assistance would be needed in 
support of short-term measures for enhancing the safety of the nuclear power plants in 
question. Similar measures should be considered for research reactors, uranium mining and 
milling facilities and installations containing radiation sources used in medicine, agriculture 
and industry. 
102. Slovenia noted with satisfaction the great efforts which had been made to ensure the 
safety of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe. It was essential that those plants be as safe 
as possible during their remaining operating lives and that the countries in question therefore 
have access to the various sources of available assistance - including information. 
103. The Slovenian delegation considered nuclear safety to be the Agency's priority 
activity, and consequently it strongly supported the OSART, ASSET and INSARR services, 
IPERS and other safety-related services. 
104. His Government considered that the activities of the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage were also very important and hoped that the work of revising the 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage would soon be completed. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 28 


105. Slovenia supported the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and 
the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, 
which had been drawn up after the Chernobyl accident, and was in favour of regular testing 
and improvement of their provisions. 
106. It welcomed the formation by the Agency, in co-operation with FAO, ILO, 
NEA/OECD, WHO and PAHO, of a committee to deal with basic safety standards for 
radiation protection and supported the Agency's endeavours to establish modern standards. 
107. It also welcomed the steps which had been taken to develop several projects in cooperation 
with FAO and WHO - for example, projects relating to food irradiation and a 
project for eradicating the tsetse fly from Zanzibar Island. In addition, Agency activities 
relating to the application of nuclear techniques in environmental protection - including flue 
gas purification - were to be commended. 
108. Noting that many Member States had hosted and funded a number of Agency training 
courses and workshops on nuclear matters, he expressed his Government's full support for 
the Agency's endeavours in the area of education and training. Slovenia, which had 
benefited from Agency technical co-operation programmes, was ready to place its nuclear 
training centre at the disposal of the Agency for such courses and seminars. 
109. Mr. PEYRAT (Paraguay') said that his country was in favour of nuclear energy 
being used for peaceful purposes and earnestly hoped that its diversion to military uses would 
be prevented. Paraguay, being an agricultural country urgently in need of appropriate 
techniques for its development and having entered into legal undertakings concerning the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons and safeguards, looked to the Agency for assistance in 
acquiring equipment, facilities, services and technologies for research in support of its 
agricultural, health and industrial sectors. 
110. The co-operation of States was essential in order to promote development and safety 
at the regional level; in that connection Paraguay welcomed the bilateral agreement setting 
up the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 
(ABACC). Positive decisions had been taken in other regions regarding vertical proliferation 
and the elimination of existing nuclear weapons, with utilization of the nuclear material in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 29 


them for peaceful purposes. Such developments were welcome as they might lead to the 
establishment, in various parts of the world, of nuclear-weapon-free zones like the one 
envisaged by the Tlatelolco Treaty. 

111. Turning to the subject of nuclear safety and radiological protection, to which his 
country attached great importance, he said that Paraguay was currently drawing up basic 
standards. In addition, radiological protection and nuclear safety were being taught at 
medical faculties and in short courses intended for doctors, technologists and people working 
with radioactive materials. 
112. In order to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiological 
protection, the National Atomic Energy Commission was currently setting up a 
multidisciplinary project in which bodies such as the Ministry of Public Health and Social 
Welfare would participate. For other projects concerning the environment and biomedicine, 
Paraguay would need the technical and economic assistance of the Agency. 
113. As an agricultural and stock-raising country without access to the sea, Paraguay had 
to contend with complicated customs formalities which caused the loss of practically 50% of 
its perishable exportable produce. Accordingly, it had urgent technician training 
requirements in the field of food irradiation. In addition, Paraguay needed low-cost 
desalination technology so as to be able to colonize and develop the Chaco plain, where there 
were major reserves of brackish underground water. 
114. Under its technical co-operation programme, the Agency had assisted Paraguay with inter 
alia - the application of nuclear techniques, the establishment of a nuclear 
instrumentation laboratory, the acquisition of radiation protection equipment, the 
measurement of low-level radiation, the diagnosis and eradication of animal diseases, 
application of the ELIS A technique, the establishment of radioimmunoassay laboratories and 
the use of tracers in hydrochemistry and bacteriology. 
115. However, it was to ARCAL that Paraguay attached the greatest importance, believing 
that the Agency should provide more resources and negotiate contributions from countries 
and establishments outside the ARCAL region. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 30 


116. The Paraguayan delegation was concerned about the percentage decline in technical 
assistance provided to Latin America. It was also concerned about the envisaged 12% cut 
in 1994 financial plans and the possible impact on Agency technical co-operation activities. 
In view of the Agency's continuing financial difficulties, it was essential to determine the 
likely effectiveness of programmes that might be included in the Medium-Term Plan for 
1995-2000, which should preclude duplication, ensure maximum rationalization, provide for 
the participation of developing countries - which might make available the services of 
experts - and promote the involvement of women. 
117. The refusal by the DPRK to implement the safeguards agreement which it had 
concluded with the Agency under the NPT created a dangerous situation, and Paraguay urged 
the DPRK to fulfil the obligations it had undertaken. It hoped that the Director General 
would continue with his endeavours to achieve full implementation of the safeguards 
agreement and thereby prevent the creation of a precedent that would impede the 
establishment of a universal non-proliferation system. In that connection, his delegation 
supported those delegations which had called for the creation of a committee open to all 
States - to carry out a continuous, in-depth study of matters connected with the strengthening 
of safeguards, which were at present being considered by the Board of Governors in a 
discontinuous, piecemeal fashion. The committee, whose deliberations should be subject to 
a time-limit, might have as its task the formulation of recommendations for achieving 
universality of safeguards without affecting existing safeguards agreements. 
118. The major upheavals currently taking place in the world should be an occasion for 
promoting development and security through the wise use of nuclear energy, an end to which 
all countries should strive. 
119. Mr. MTELEKA (United Republic of Tanzania) said his country was grateful 
to the Agency for the technical assistance which it had provided in helping to establish a 
viable radiation protection infrastructure and promote the application of nuclear techniques 
under Tanzania's National Nuclear Technology Transfer Programme. Implementation of the 
country's modest nuclear technology programme, initiated two years previously with the help 
of a RAP AT mission, and the establishment of a radiation protection infrastructure, initiated 
ten years previously, were progressing well. That had only been possible because of the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 31 


unfailing attention paid by the Agency's staff to Tanzanian projects financed from the TACF. 
Tanzania hoped that the present excellent co-operation would continue and that high project 
implementation rates would be achieved. 

120. Because of economic constraints, Tanzania's efforts to acquire nuclear technology 
depended to a great extent on the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme. 
The success of those efforts in areas such as agriculture, industry, medicine and research had 
been due mainly to an increase in the amount of technical assistance provided to Tanzania. 
His country was therefore extremely concerned about the widening gap between the total 
contributions actually made to the TACF and the agreed TACF target, which would have a 
serious negative impact on the nuclear technology acquisition programmes of developing 
countries, and particularly LDCs. In their interest, his delegation urged all Member States 
to make a greater effort to contribute to the TACF. Furthermore, his delegation reiterated 
the call made by most developing countries for technical assistance to be funded through the 
Regular Budget or from comparably predictable and assured resources. Tanzania believed 
that technical co-operation had been and was still instrumental in creating the infrastructure 
necessary for an expansion of nuclear technology applications. 
121. It was of prime importance for the Agency to maintain an appropriate balance 
between its promotional activities and not expand some at the expense of the other. 
Otherwise, the justifiable need to strengthen safeguards and the resulting additional expense 
would lead to a considerable decrease in the contributions made to the TACF for financing 
promotional activities, particularly those relating to the non-power uses of nuclear energy. 
The overemphasizing of one of the Agency's two essential functions to the detriment of the 
other would undermine the Agency. Although it would be very difficult to link promotion 
of the non-proliferation regime with official development aid, the idea should be investigated, 
for it was very important to try to strengthen the regime and make the NPT more universal. 
At the same time, the Cold War was over and the nuclear-weapon States should increase 
their efforts directed towards a comprehensive nuclear test ban and ultimately nuclear 
disarmament. 
122. In order to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, it was necessary to minimize 
proliferation. Although the NPT was not all-powerful, it was the core of the non

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 32 


proliferation regime, and efforts should therefore be made to strengthen it through alternative 
approaches. In the interests of the continued success of the NPT, all parties involved in 
ongoing discussions - and particularly the Agency, the NPT depositary States and the 
DPRK - should be patient and exercise diplomacy, abiding by the golden rule of problem 
settlement through peaceful negotiations, which were absolutely essential to the achievement 
of harmony, peace, security and the success of the NPT. The use of economic or military 
pressure only aggravated the problem and, although it might lead to a temporary solution, 
would destroy all goodwill among the parties. A peaceful settlement of the problem required 
that the parties try to understand each other's point of view and, in so doing, appreciate the 
importance of safeguards as the real guarantee of compliance with the NPT. He wished to 
emphasize, however, that "nuclear problems" and cases of non-compliance with the NPT 
would continue to arise as long as it was accepted that some NPT parties had the right to 
possess nuclear weapons. 

123. In 1992, noting South Africa's accession to the NPT and the conclusion of an 
NPT safeguards agreement between South Africa and the Agency, the United Nations and 
the General Conference had emphasized the need for a complete inventory of the nuclear 
installations and material in South Africa which were subject to the safeguards agreement, 
in order to ensure peace and security in the region. Tanzania warmly welcomed the ongoing 
developments in South Africa, which gave cause for hope that Africa would become a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone, and hoped that all Member States would co-operate with the 
Director General to that end. 
124. According to the report by the Director General on the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities in 1992, the overall implementation rate in 1992 had been 59.3 %. For 
LDCs, however, the implementation rate had been much lower. The reasons for that should 
be found and the problems resolved. In the opinion of his delegation, one problem was the 
Agency's rigid policy of not financing operational activities and not helping to establish basic 
infrastructure even after the need for it to do so had become evident during project 
implementation. The Agency should demonstrate some flexibility, particularly with regard 
to LDCs, in order to ensure the success of its projects and not lose the benefits of its initial 
investments. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 33 


125. The Agency was to be commended for its efforts to promote regional co-operation 
aimed at expediting the transfer of nuclear technology to developing countries. The support 
given to Asia and the Pacific through RCA, to Latin American countries through ARCAL 
and now to African countries through AFRA ensured the efficient and effective use of 
available resources and also promoted peace and understanding in the regions concerned. 
His delegation strongly supported the Agency's efforts in that direction and urged the Agency 
to devote more attention to AFRA, in which it would like to see further States joining. Also, 
his delegation greatly appreciated the extrabudgetary contributions made by France and Spain 
in support of various AFRA projects and hoped that other countries would come forward and 
support the remaining projects. 
126. The Agency had done good work in strengthening international co-operation in 
matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological protection, the efforts in question relating 
directly to the Agency's statutory obligations. His delegation particularly endorsed the 
efforts aimed at the implementation of a programme for education and training in radiological 
protection and nuclear safety. 
127. Mr. POPAL (Afghanistan) said that for 15 years the Afghan nation had fought 
against a Superpower armed to the teeth with modern weapons. At the beginning of the 
Afghan Jihad, defeating the former Soviet Union had for some people seemed but a dream. 
Through reliance on God and belief in the Afghan Jihad, however, the Afghans had defeated 
the former Soviet Union - and the dream had come true. 
128. Unfortunately, that success had cost Afghanistan dear: more than a million and a half 
people had been killed, there were more than a million war invalids, the country's industry, 
agriculture and educational and residential infrastructure had been almost completely 
destroyed, and some five million Afghans had been forced to leave their homes and seek 
refuge in other countries. 
129. European, Asian and Arab countries and the United States of America had helped the 
Afghans to achieve freedom. In addition, world public opinion, the realistic judgement of 
international organizations and the influence of distinguished individuals with great 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 34 


international stature had contributed significantly to the success of the Afghan nation, which 
was sincerely grateful to them all. 


130. Since the success of the Islamic revolution in Afghanistan, however, most of those 
who had helped the country during the Jihad years had become indifferent to the fate of the 
people of ruined Afghanistan. The Afghan people had hoped that they would give them 
urgent assistance in the reconstruction of the country and prevent foreign interference in their 
internal affairs. Under the leadership of the President of the Islamic State of Afghanistan, 
Mr. Burhanudin Rabani, they were taking active steps to establish a government of law and 
order, democracy, good relations with all countries of the world, and respect for human 
rights (including women's rights) to provide education for the younger generation, to combat 
illiteracy and the production of and trafficking in narcotics, and to organize free elections 
under the supervision of the United Nations and the Conference of Islamic States. 
131. Recently, the President - a university professor - had urged all intellectuals living 
abroad to return to Afghanistan and play a sincere part in the rehabilitation of the country. 
Also, he had launched a national campaign against all kinds of negative phenomena and put 
a stop to all war propaganda. 
132. Calling upon delegations to convey to their governments and people what he had just 
been saying on behalf of a nation whose country had been ruined, he expressed the hope that 
Afghanistan would receive the economic and scientific aid it urgently needed, that countries 
which had helped Afghanistan during the Jihad years would reopen their embassies in Kabul 
and that the indifference to the fate of the Afghan people would end. 
133. With regard to the atomic energy situation in Afghanistan, since 1978 atomic energy 
matters had been the responsibility of the National Atomic Commission of Afghanistan 
(NAECA), which was presided over by the Dean of Kabul University's Faculty of Science. 
From 1957 to 1990 the Agency had assisted Afghanistan with projects relating to neutron 
activation, X-ray fluorescence, liquid nitrogen, neutronic hygrometry, nuclear electronics and 
cobalt therapy. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 35 


134. Only three of the six projects in question were active. The others were in suspense, 
and in order to activate them Agency experts must come to Kabul and install the equipment 
at appropriate locations. 
135. Referring to the cobalt therapy project, he said that, with the Agency's assistance, a 
cobalt therapy unit with a cobalt-60 source supplied by Hungary had been established at the 
Ali-Abad University Hospital in 1978. Since then about 7000 cancer patients from all over 
Afghanistan had been treated. Because of the war, the cobalt-60 source had not been 
renewed and its activity had fallen to less than 700 Ci. As a result, the exposure time for 
each field had been increased from 10-15 seconds to 10-15 minutes, and the treatment of 
most patients had had to be delayed for several days. The limited number of radiologists, 
physicists and technicians had also caused serious problems. Fortunately, a cyclotherapy unit 
was to be delivered to Afghanistan and installed shortly, and that should solve the problems 
in that area. However, Agency specialists were still needed in order to put the unit into 
operation at the Ali-Abad Hospital. 
136. In 1990 there had been plans to provide Afghanistan with a radioisotope generator for 
the production of iodine-131, technetium, etc. and with two scholarships and two fellowships 
for training in radiation therapy. So far, the only thing actually provided had been one of 
the fellowships. He hoped that the plans in question would ultimately be implemented in 
full. 
137. In 1986 Afghanistan had submitted four project proposals to the Agency, which had 
accepted three - relating to dosimetry in radiation therapy, radiation protection and a 
nitrogen-15 analysis. Unfortunately, because of the war in Afghanistan the three projects in 
question had not been implemented. He hoped that they would be implemented in due 
course. 
138. Afghanistan had urgent needs in the areas of food and animal feed preservation, 
radiation protection and electricity generation, and it looked forward to receiving assistance 
from the Agency in those areas. 
139. Mr. TASHJIAN (Armenia) expressing his Government's gratitude to the 
General Conference for its having approved Armenia for membership of the Agency, said 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.360 
page 36 


that his country was fully aware of the responsibilities of Agency membership and would 
continue to support the utilization of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 


140. In the former Soviet Union, Armenia had been in the forefront both of nuclear 
research and of nuclear power generation, with two WWER-440/230 plants. The two plants 
had been shut down early in 1989 by Government decision for a safety evaluation, after 
operating for 20 reactor-years and generating over 45 billion kW  h of electrical energy 
without any significant incidents. 
141. Armenia was currently in the midst of an energy crisis due to the political 
environment in the region; electricity for residential use could be provided for only 2-4 hours 
each day, and industry was at best able to operate at only 30% of its capacity. Accordingly, 
the Armenian Government had no choice but to reactivate the country's two nuclear power 
plants. 
142. In order to meet the country's minimum energy requirements and alleviate undue 
human suffering, his Government wished to co-operate closely with the Agency, and in that 
context it committed itself to working to make the world a safer place for all. 
The meeting rose at 6.10 p.m. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
28 October 1993 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 1 October 1993, at 10.40 a.m. 


President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of the 
Whole on the following items: 1-48 
Harmony and compatibility of programme and 
budget accounts documents 20-2 1 
The Agency's accounts for 1992 22 
The Agency's budget for 1994 23 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
towards the Regular BudgetMeasures to strengthen international co-operation 
in matters relating to nuclear safety and radiological 
protection 
24 - 36 
37 
Practical utilization of food irradiation in developing 
countries 38 
Plan for producing potable water economically 39 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 

93-3850 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 


page 2 


Item of the 
agenda* 


23 

DPRK 
NPT 
UN 

Strengthening of the Agency's main activities 


Strengthening the effectiveness and improving 
the efficiency of the safeguards system 
The financing of safeguards 


The financing of technical assistance 
Personnel questions 


(a) Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
(b) Women in the Secretariat 
Article VI of the Statute 
(a) Amendment of Article VI. A.2 of 
the Statute 
(b) Revision of Article VI as a whole 


Implementation of the agreement between the Agency 
and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for 
the application of safeguards in connection with the 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
United Nations 

Paragraphs 


40 

41 
42-43 
44 

45 

46 
47-48 

49 - 159 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 3 


ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 


1. Mr. POSTA (Hungary), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, presented 
the Committee's report on items 10-22 of the agenda. 
2. Under item 10, "Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget and accounts 
documents", the Committee recommended that the General Conference take note with 
appreciation of the information contained in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/322 with the hope 
that a final report on the item would be before the General Conference at its next regular 
session in accordance with the requests contained in resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/581. 
3. Under item 11, "The Agency' s accounts for 1992", the Committee recommended that 
the Conference adopt the draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXVII)/1061. 
4. Under item 12, "The Agency's budget for 1994", the Committee recommended that 
the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C in Annex IV to document 
GC(XXXVII)/1062. 
5. Under item 13, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the Regular 
Budget", the Committee recommended adoption of the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1070/Add.1 with the scale of assessment contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1070. 
6. In the Committee's discussion, two delegations (those of Ukraine and Belarus) had 
expressed reservations concerning their countries' assessment rates, but had not blocked 
consensus in the Committee. 
7. Under item 14, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating 
to nuclear safety and radiological protection", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the following two draft resolutions: 
(a) 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1089 on "Measures to resolve 
international radioactive waste management issues"; and 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 4 


(b) 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1093 relating to subitem 
14(a)(iv) and entitled "Strengthening nuclear safety through the early 
conclusion of a nuclear safety convention". 
8. The relatively low number of draft resolutions and requests for reports arising out of 
the Committee's consideration of agenda item 14 was due to the general understanding in the 
Committee that delegations should exercise restraint in that regard in view of time constraints 
and the current budgetary restrictions. Although no draft resolutions on other matters 
covered by item 14 were before the Conference, there had been general appreciation in the 
Committee for the Secretariat's efforts in the various fields in question, and the Secretariat 
had been urged to continue with those efforts within the framework of the Agency's 
programmes and budget. 
9. Under item 15, "Practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXVII)/1094. 
10. Under item 16, "Plan for producing potable water economically", the Committee 
recommended the adoption by the Conference of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1092. 
11. Under item 17, "Strengthening of the Agency's main activities", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1095. 
12. Under item 18, "Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the 
safeguards system", the Committee recommended for adoption by the Conference the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1096/Rev.1. 
13. Under item 19, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference take note with appreciation of the report of the Board of Governors contained in 
the Annex to document GC(XXXVII)/1063 and in addition request the Board of Governors 
to re-establish the Informal Working Group on the Financing of Safeguards. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 5 


14. Under item 20, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee recommended 
to the Conference the adoption of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1097. 
15. Under item 21, "Personnel questions", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1100 entitled "Staffing of 
the Agency's Secretariat" and the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1101 entitled 
"Women in the Secretariat". 
16. Under item 22, "Article VI of the Statute", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1102, relating to 
sub-item 22(a) and entitled "Amendment of Article VI.A.2". 

17. With regard to sub-item 22(b), "Revision of Article VI as a whole", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference take note with appreciation of document 
GC(XXXVII)/1082 and Add.l and in addition endorse the proposal contained in 
paragraph 19 of the Appendix to document GC(XXXVII)/1082 relating to the reestablishment 
of the Informal Working Group established to review all relevant aspects of 
Article VI as a whole. The suggestion in paragraph 16 of the Appendix to document 
GC(XXXVII)/1082, that the General Conference request Member States to submit written 
comments on a possible review of the membership of the Board had enjoyed wide support 
in the Committee. 
18. In conclusion, he thanked the members of the Committee for their co-operative spirit 
and the two Vice-Chairmen, Mr. Schmidt of Austria and Mr. Perez-Martin of Cuba, for their 
support. 
19. The PRESIDENT suggested that the Conference take one by one the items 
considered by the Committee of the Whole. 
Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget and accounts documents 

20. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of the information 
contained in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/322. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 6 


21. It was so decided. 
The Agency's accounts for 1992 


22. The draft resolution on page III of document GC(XXXVII)/1061 was adopted. 
The Agency's budget for 1994 


23. Draft resolutions A. B and C in Annex IV to document GC(XXXVII)/1062 were 
adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the Regular Budget 


24. Mr. KOSTENKO (Ukraine) said that his delegation could not agree to the 
increase in the assessment rate for Ukraine to 1.996% envisaged in the Annex to document 
GC(XXXVII)/1070 as the increase was unjustified in every respect. 
25. In opting for a purely mechanical redistribution of the contribution of the former 
USSR, the UN Committee on Contributions had in effect departed from principles and 
criteria which had proven their worth over a period of several decades. Commenting on the 
decisions regarding the redistribution of contributions which the General Assembly had taken 
at its 27th session, the UN Legal Counsel had stated that the Committee on Contributions did 
not have a mandate to change Ukraine's contribution and that the decisions taken contradicted 
UN rules of procedure. 
26. The envisaged increase to nearly 2 % in the assessment rate for Ukraine's contribution 
towards the Agency's Regular Budget was being decided on at a time when his country was 
going through a very difficult period. Ukraine's ability to pay was being impaired by major 
economic problems associated with the country's becoming an independent State, by the 
profound political and economic reforms which were taking place in Ukraine and by the 
enormous expenditures necessary for dealing with the consequences of the Chernobyl 
accident. 
27. In addition, Ukraine was suffering great economic losses as a result of: its complying 
with the UN Security Council resolution by means of which sanctions had been imposed on 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia; reductions in the delivery of petroleum and other energy 
carriers; and unresolved payments questions involving other countries of the former USSR. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 7 


28. One reason for the excessively high contributions required of Ukraine by the United 
Nations and other organizations was the fact that the former USSR had always provided, as 
a basis for working out contributions, statistical data which reflected an unrealistic rate of 
exchange between-the rouble and the United States dollar. In the former USSR, Ukraine had 
never had any real influence on foreign exchange and financial policies, which had been 
formulated centrally, and it should not now have to pay for those policies. 
29. His Government had informed the UN Secretary-General that, in making future 
payments towards the UN Regular Budget, Ukraine would base itself on the scale of 
assessment which the General Assembly had approved in 1991 when adopting resolution 
46/221 by consensus. 
30. In the view of his Government, scales of assessment should be fair and be based on 
universally accepted principles and criteria, account being taken of the specific circumstances 
in different countries. Accordingly, his Government had submitted to the UN Committee 
on Contributions national income data computed using the UN methodology, with the 
suggestion that for purposes of conversion use be made of the rouble/dollar exchange rate 
specially computed by the International Monetary Fund. 
31. In addition, his Government had requested a review of Ukraine's assessment rate by 
the Committee on Contributions, in the hope that the Committee would take account of the 
current difficult social and economic conditions in Ukraine and propose a reduction of the 
rate in keeping with Ukraine's true ability to pay. 
32. Despite its economic problems, Ukraine, which was endeavouring to meet its prioryear 
obligations, had made a payment of half a million United States dollars towards that 
end. However, an increase in Ukraine's assessment rate to nearly 2% would simply make 
the task more difficult for his country, which still owed the Agency over five million United 
States dollars. 
33. His delegation could therefore not support the draft resolution set forth in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1070/Add.1. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 8 


34. The PRESIDENT said that the statement made by the representative of 
Ukraine would be reflected in the summary record, but that the matter raised by him was one 
for the UN Committee on Contributions to resolve. 
35. He went on to ask whether, as recommended by the Committee of the Whole, the 
Conference wished to adopt by consensus the draft resolution on the scale of assessment of 
Members' contributions towards the Regular Budget contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1070/Add.l, with the table contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1070. 
36. It was so decided. 
Measures to strengthen international co-operation in matters relating to nuclear safety and 
radiological protection 

37. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1089 entitled "Measures to resolve 
international radioactive waste management issues" and the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVII/1093 relating to sub-item 14(a)(iv) and entitled "Strengthening nuclear safety 
through the early conclusion of a nuclear safety convention" were adopted. 
Practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries 

38. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1094 was adopted. 
Plan for producing potable water economically 
39. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1092 was adopted. 
Strengthening of the Agency's main activities 
40. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1095 was adopted. 
Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the safeguards system 
41. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1096/Rev.1 was adopted. 
The financing of safeguards 
42. The PRESIDENT assumed that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of the report of the 
Board of Governors contained in the Annex to document GC(XXXVII)/1063 and to request 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 9 


the Board of Governors to re-establish the Informal Working Group on the Financing of 
Safeguards. 

43. It was so decided. 
The financing of technical assistance 
44. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1097 was adopted. 
Personnel questions 
(a) Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
(b) Women in the Secretariat 
45. The draft resolutions in documents GC(XXXVII)/1100 and GC(XXXVII)/1101 were 

adopted. 
Article VI of the Statute 


(a) Amendment of Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute 
46. The draft resolution in document GCfXXXVII)/1102 was adopted. 
(b) Revision of Article VI as a whole 
47. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of documents 
GC(XXXVII)/1082 and 1082/Add.l, to request the Board of Governors to re-establish the 
Informal Working Group established to review all aspects of Article VI as a whole and to 
request Member States to submit written comments on a possible review of the membership 
of the Board. 
48. It was so decided. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 10 


IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE AGENCY AND THE 
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA FOR THE APPLICATION OF 
SAFEGUARDS IN CONNECTION WITH THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION 
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (GC(XXXVII)/1084 and 1084/Add.l, 
GC(XXXVII)/1090 and 1090/Add.1-3) 

49. The PRESIDENT invited the delegate of Canada to introduce the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090. 
50. Mr. CHEN (China), speaking on a point of order, said that it was a 
contravention of the Conference's Rules of Procedure to introduce a draft resolution before 
the Conference had had a general discussion of the matter to which the draft resolution 
related. 
51. The PRESIDENT replied that, if the draft resolution were introduced at the 
outset, delegates would then be able to comment on it when they spoke in the general 
discussion under agenda item 23. 
52. Mr. CHEN (China) said that there should be a general discussion before the 
draft resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1090 was introduced. 
53. The PRESIDENT said that, if the delegate of Canada had no objections, the 
Conference would first conduct a general discussion under agenda item 23. 
54. Mr. KIM (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said his delegation 
regarded the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090 as a violation of his 
country's sovereignty as it ignored the nuclear threat to the DPRK posed by the United States 
and the misconduct of certain members of the Agency's Secretariat. 
55. The DPRK had made every effort to implement its safeguards agreement with the 
Agency and had consistently called for negotiations to resolve the complicated issues still 
outstanding. However, certain members of the Agency's Secretariat had ignored the DPRK's 
sincere efforts and, in February, had called for special inspections in the DPRK. Also, they 
had induced the Board to adopt, on 1 April, a "resolution" finding the DPRK "in noncompliance 
with its obligations under its Safeguards Agreement with the Agency" and 
referring the matter to the Security Council and General Assembly of the United Nations. 
Furthermore, they had accepted "intelligence information" fabricated by one Member State 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 11 


against another, towards which it was hostile, and had used it for Agency activities, thereby 
making the Agency an instrument of the double-standard policy of a Superpower and 
disgracing the Agency. It was to be hoped that the Agency would immediately take the 
necessary measures to prevent itself becoming politicized to the point where it lost sight of 
its mandate and objectives. 

56. It seemed to his delegation that certain members of the Agency's Secretariat had 
joined forces with that hostile nation in an attempt to gain access to the DPRK's military 
installations, using inspections as a means to strangle the DPRK's socialist system. Such 
action on the part of the Secretariat was politically and militarily unacceptable, and it 
contravened both the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the DPRK and the terms 
of the Agency's Statute. 
57. The Secretariat members whom he had in mind, who had not taken account of the 
characteristics of the nuclear facilities which the DPRK had built through its own efforts, had 
invented "inconsistencies" for publicity purposes and in order to create - as a prelude to 
international pressure and sanctions - suspicion regarding a possible nuclear weapons 
programme in the DPRK. 
58. Despite the DPRK's repeated calls for consultations to clarify the alleged 
inconsistencies, they had ignored the dispute resolution procedures provided for in the 
DPRK's safeguards agreement with the Agency and unreasonably invoked the right to 
" special inspections". 
59. The Secretariat would have to bear full responsibility for the consequences of the 
misconduct of some of its members - consequences which could not be undone. 
60. Those consequences had been among the main factors which had compelled the DPRK 
to decide to withdraw from NPT. 
61. His Government remained fully committed to finding a fundamental solution of the 
nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula, and to that end it had been holding bilateral talks with 
the United States of America, in which some progress had been made. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 12 


62. Pursuant to an agreement reached during the talks, the DPRK had recently held 
consultations with the Agency's Secretariat on the question of the latter's partiality and on 
other matters related to the implementation of the DPRK's safeguards agreement. Although 
no progress had been made, owing to differences of view, both sides had manifested a desire 
to continue the consultations, and in that connection he wished to emphasize that no one 
could expect everything to be resolved in one round of consultations. 
63. That notwithstanding, a further unjust resolution directed against the DPRK had been 
adopted by the Board on 23 September, owing to the machinations of certain countries. 
64. The adoption of that resolution had been a face-saving exercise designed to cover up 
the unjust behaviour of certain members of the Agency's Secretariat and shift the blame for 
non-compliance onto the DPRK. 
65. His delegation rejected that resolution, regarding it as an attempt to block progress 
towards a solution of the nuclear issue, spoil the atmosphere of dialogue and bring matters 
back to square one. 
66. His country had been devoting great efforts to meeting its growing energy needs 
through the peaceful application of nuclear power. 
67. However, since the economic blockade and sanctions operated by certain countries 
had denied the DPRK access to high-tech light-water reactors, his country had decided to 
establish its own independent, self-supporting nuclear power industry based on domestic 
resources and technology. 
68. The DPRK was currently operating a 5 MW(e) experimental nuclear power plant 
based on domestic materials and technology, and there were a 50 MW(e) and a 200 MW(e) 
nuclear power plant under construction. The DPRK was planning to establish a programme 
under which the existing graphite-moderated reactors would be replaced by light-water 
reactors, the intention being to eradicate the "suspicions" about its nuclear programme. Such 
a decision would entail enormous sacrifices and huge investments. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 13 


69. In the light of those facts, it was clear that the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula 
was not simply a technical matter to be resolved by the DPRK alone, but a political one 
generated by the United States deployment of nuclear weapons in South Korea. 
70. The United States had admitted as much by agreeing to start talks with the DPRK and 
by giving assurances that it would abstain from threats and the use of force, including nuclear 
weapons, against the DPRK. 
71. In the interests of resolving the differences between the DPRK and the United States, 
his Government had unilaterally suspended effectuation of the DPRK's withdrawal from NPT 
at the request of the United States, and in the present extraordinary situation the DPRK had, 
with a view to demonstrating the transparency of its nuclear activities, allowed the Agency 
to conduct inspections for the purpose of maintaining safeguards continuity. It had permitted 
the maintenance and replacement of surveillance equipment, as requested by the Secretariat, 
so that all nuclear activities in the DPRK were now under strict safeguards. 
72. His country had intended to resolve the inspection issue through consultations with 
the Secretariat, provided that the agreements reached in the bilateral talks between the DPRK 
and the United States were implemented. Despite the DPRK's consultation efforts, however, 
the issue had been hurriedly referred to the General Conference as a result of machinations 
by certain countries. The resulting situation resembled the situation which had developed in 
February, when certain members of the Secretariat and the representatives of certain 
countries had ignored the DPRK's call for continuing ad hoc inspections and for consultations 
aimed at clarifying the alleged inconsistencies. 
73. The DPRK, which would not succumb to pressure, had been consistent in calling for 
a solution through negotiation, and his delegation was convinced that a successful outcome 
to the bilateral talks with the United States would lead to a solution of the inspections issue. 
Attempts to apply pressure during the Conference's current session would seriously harm 
prospects of a negotiated solution to the nuclear issue. 
74. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that all Member States would weigh up the 
present situation and encourage dialogue and consultation between the parties concerned in 
order that a solution to the nuclear issue might be found. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 14 


75. Mr. CHEN (China) recalled that his delegation had opposed the inclusion of 
the item on the DPRK in the General Conference's agenda and noted that the present 
situation with regard to the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency 
and the DPRK was very regrettable. 
76. Initially, the implementation of that agreement had been smooth; the DPRK had 
received Agency inspection teams on several occasions, and Agency officials had visited one 
of the two sites in dispute. Later on, however, differences had arisen between the Agency 
and the DPRK. 
77. Such differences were nothing abnormal, however, and they could have been resolved 
if the right approach had been adopted. Regrettably, the conflict had escalated after 
February, the situation becoming very tense. After June, as a result of constructive efforts 
on the part of all concerned, three-track negotiations had started among the four parties and 
the situation had to some extent been defused. Those positive developments had 
demonstrated that the right approach was to seek solutions through negotiations and 
consultations, and there were grounds to believe that, if the parties had continued the 
negotiations with a flexible and co-operative attitude, a just and comprehensive solution 
would have been found. 
78. Unfortunately the situation had worsened again during the Board meetings in 
September, following the first round of consultations between the DPRK and the Agency, 
which had not produced satisfactory results. In view of the huge differences that existed 
between the Agency and the DPRK, however, it was unrealistic to expect that a solution to 
all problems could be found through just one or two rounds of talks. On the other hand, 
resort to other resolution methods would simply make matters worse. 
79. His delegation therefore believed that the four parties should continue negotiations in 
an effort to find a just and comprehensive solution. The problems, which could not be 
resolved by unilateral action, should be discussed by the four parties in all three sets of 
negotiations simultaneously, and the parties should demonstrate political sincerity and 
exercise the necessary patience. His delegation hoped that a good atmosphere, based on 
equality and mutual respect, would be created for the negotiations. There was no point in 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 15 


acting with undue haste, and it would be unwise to impose unreasonable preconditions and 
to exert pressure. 


80. As it was important to maintain continuity of safeguards information, the Agency and 
the DPRK should start the second round of negotiations immediately, and the other two sets 
of negotiations should start as soon as possible after that. 
81. China, which did not advocate or engage in nuclear proliferation, fulfilled its NPT 
obligations and would welcome it if every country in the world were party to NPT. It 
favoured the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones and supported the efforts of the 
Agency to implement the safeguards agreements concluded with its Member States. 
82. In order to realize the objectives of NPT, it was essential to eliminate the nuclear 
threat faced by non-nuclear-weapon States. All nuclear-weapon States should therefore make 
an unconditional commitment not to use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear-weapon States 
or in nuclear-weapon-free zones. For its part, China had already made such a commitment. 
83. China strongly supported the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula and was 
opposed to the existence of any nuclear weapons on the Peninsula. It therefore hoped that 
all the parties concerned would co-operate in finding satisfactory solutions to the current 
problems as soon as possible, so as to ensure peace and security in that area. 
84. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium), speaking on behalf of the twelve member States 
of the European Community, said they hoped that the vote on the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(XXXVII)/1090 would reflect the serious concern felt by the vast majority 
of the Agency's Member States about the situation in the DPRK. 
85. The reasons for that concern were: the Agency's inability to verify the non-diversion 
of nuclear material required to be safeguarded in the DPRK, referred to in the resolution 
adopted by the Board of Governors on 1 April; the recent aggravation of the situation, due 
to the fact that, quite apart from the rejection of the request for special inspections, routine 
and ad hoc inspections could no longer be carried out; and the risk that the continuity of 
safeguards would be lost. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 16 


86. The wording of the draft resolution reflected the restraint which the international 
community was continuing to show in the hope that a reasonable consensus solution would 
be found to a very serious problem. Such restraint should not, however, be regarded as a 
sign of tolerance towards the blatant violation by a Member State of its international 
obligations. 
87. The DPRK could not refuse to permit inspections of the nuclear installations which 
the Agency had designated in accordance with the procedures in force. The Twelve believed 
that the consultations between the Agency and the DPRK could be resumed with real 
prospects of success only if the DPRK gave up trying to restrict their scope or to impose 
preconditions. 
88. Finally, it should be recalled that the United Nations Security Council remained seized 
of the matter and that the Director General would inform it of the General Conference's 
conclusions and any further developments, as requested in Security Council resolution 825. 
89. Mr. WALKER (Australia) stressed that the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1090 was in no way motivated by hostility towards the DPRK, as had been 
suggested. Its sole aim was that the DPRK should observe its international obligations, 
including its obligation towards the 159 other parties to NPT, and thereby help to reduce 
tension on the Korean Peninsula. 
90. His country believed that all political problems should be resolved through negotiation 
and welcomed the DPRK's dialogue with the United States and its consultations with the 
Secretariat. Also, it continued to call for constructive dialogue between the two Koreas. 
However, it could not accept that implementation of the safeguards agreement between the 
DPRK and the Agency should be a matter for negotiation or be subject to conditions imposed 
by the DPRK, and it could not authorize the Secretariat to apply to the DPRK a lower 
standard in its safeguards operations than that applied to Australia and other Member States. 
91. In conclusion, he appealed to the DPRK to co-operate with the Agency in achieving 
full implementation of the safeguards agreement and to begin by permitting scheduled ad hoc 
and routine inspections, since, as noted by the delegate of China, it was important to 
maintain continuity of safeguards information. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 17 


92. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) said that the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090 clearly and strongly expressed the international 
community's views on the subject under consideration and that her delegation endorsed the 
efforts made by the Director General and the Secretariat to implement full-scope safeguards 
in the DPRK. 
93. As the General Conference was aware, the United States - in response to Security 
Council resolution 825 - had engaged the DPRK in discussions aimed at helping to resolve 
the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula. Although some progress had been achieved, her 
country was deeply concerned that the DPRK had not yet agreed to the routine and ad hoc 
inspections recently requested by the Agency. 
94. Those inspections were essential in order to preserve the continuity of safeguards, and 
they were therefore a basis for continuation of the discussions between her country and the 
DPRK. If her country's efforts at a dialogue with the DPRK were to fail, it would be forced 
to report the matter to the Security Council. 
95. The United States remained committed, however, to working with the DPRK and 
other interested Governments in trying to find a solution which would promote peace and 
security on the Korean Peninsula and strengthen the international non-proliferation regime. 
In that connection, her Government welcomed the statement made by the DPRK that it 
wished to pursue a negotiated solution. 
96. The issue was not a bilateral issue between the United States and the DPRK, but one 
which had generated broad international concern. Accordingly, the United States hoped both 
that the DPRK would resume consultations with the Agency and allow it to carry out the 
necessary inspections and that it would resume discussions with the Republic of Korea on the 
nuclear issue. 
97. In view of the importance of the issue for the international community, her 
Government would like the Director General to transmit the draft resolution after its 
adoption, together with the summary record of the Conference's discussion under the present 
agenda item, to the Security Council, as requested in Security Council resolution 825. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 18 


98. As United States authorities had stated time and again, her country represented no 
nuclear threat to the DPRK. That had been reaffirmed in June in a joint press release in 
which her country and the DPRK had provided to each other all the security assurances 
contained in the United Nations Charter. Her country sincerely regretted the fact that the 
DPRK continued to make unjust and untrue allegations. 
99. Finally, it should be noted that the request to the DPRK to suspend its withdrawal 
from the NPT had been made not only by her country, but by the vast majority of parties 
to the NPT. 
100. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba) said his delegation believed that, in the 
interests of resolving the issue under consideration, the negotiations between the parties 
concerned should continue and that any actions which might impede the negotation process 
and escalate tensions should be avoided. It was vital that there should be, on one hand, 
unconditional respect for the sovereignty of States and, on the other, strict compliance with 
international agreements which had been entered into voluntarily but were binding for the 
contracting parties. 
101. His delegation was grateful to the Agency and to the DPRK and other countries for 
their efforts to find a just and negotiated solution and hoped that they would ultimately 
achieve success. 
102. Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) said that the subject under discussion, 
which had caused deep and justified concern in the international community, had been before 
the Agency's Board of Governors for the past eight months and had also been examined by 
the United Nations Security Council. So far, however, no satisfactory solution had been 
found. The dialogue between the Agency and the DPRK could hardly be called satisfactory 
and the practical application of Agency safeguards - even in their traditional, routine form was 
constantly encountering difficulties which were primarily of a political nature. The 
ability of the Agency to implement its part of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK was 
being called in question. 
103. His country hoped that the DPRK would soon adopt a constructive approach and cooperate 
with the Agency. It welcomed the DPRK's decision to suspend its withdrawal from 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 19 


NPT, but believed that, following that initial step, the DPRK should now actually rescind its 
decision to withdraw and allow the Agency to fulfil its safeguards obligations. 


104. Like the entire international community, his country was interested in the exclusively 
peaceful utilization of atomic energy on the Korean Peninsula and the establishment of trust 
and co-operation between the two Koreas on the basis of the joint declaration which they had 
made some time before. 
105. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said his delegation was very concerned about 
the lack of meaningful progress in resolving the outstanding issues surrounding the DPRK's 
suspected nuclear programme. The Agency was still unable to verify the correctness and 
assess the completeness of the initial declaration made by the DPRK regarding its nuclear 
materials and facilities. The inconsistencies between the DPRK's initial declaration and the 
Agency's findings which had begun to emerge over a year before had still not been resolved, 
despite the Director General's continued efforts and the Board's repeated calls to the DPRK 
to comply fully with its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency. Access 
to additional information and to two locations, which it was believed would help to clarify 
those inconsistencies, had so far been denied by the DPRK authorities. Thus, the Agency 
had not been able to conclude that the nuclear material, notably plutonium, produced by the 
DPRK had not been diverted for weapons development. 
106. The question was how long the Agency could allow those inconsistencies to remain 
unclarified without the Agency's credibility being seriously undermined and how long the 
international community as a whole could afford to remain undecided on that crucial and 
urgent issue, which constituted a threat not only to peace and security in North East Asia, 
but also to global nuclear non-proliferation. 
107. The international community had been greatly alarmed when, in February, the DPRK 
had refused to comply with the Board's request for special inspections and when, in March, 
it had announced its decision to withdraw from the NPT. Under the circumstances, the 
Board had had no choice but to report the non-compliance of the DPRK with its safeguards 
obligations to the Security Council, as required by the Statute and the safeguards agreement. 
As a result, in May the Security Council had adopted resolution 825. The already serious 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 20 


situation had deteriorated further when the DPRK authorities had started to restrict the 
Agency's normal ad hoc and routine inspection activities to the minimum necessary for 
maintenance purposes, in violation of the relevant provisions of the safeguards agreement. 


108. The DPRK authorities, in a recent communication to the Secretariat, had indicated 
that the DPRK's obligations under the safeguards agreement with the Agency were subject 
to negotiation. However, his delegation shared the Director General's view that the 
agreement was in force and fully operational and that the Agency's safeguards activities 
carried out in accordance with it could not be subject to negotiation. Any attempt by a party 
to a safeguards agreement to fulfil its obligation on a selective basis should be resolutely 
rejected. 
109. The General Conference was faced with open and contemptuous defiance by a 
Member State of the Agency's authority. The repeated calls by the Board of Governors for 
the DPRK to comply fully with its safeguards agreement and to co-operate fully with the 
Agency had so far been rejected by the DPRK, which had challenged the Agency's main 
decision-making organ by demanding that it rescind all its resolutions relating to the issue. 
Also, the Agency's Secretariat had been accused by the DPRK of partiality in its inspection 
activities and of manipulating the decision-making process in the Board and the General 
Conference. The DPRK had even gone so far as to demand that the Secretariat admit and 
apologize for its partiality and that it call to account the staff members responsible. Now it 
was time for the international community to take a firm stand and announce its determination 
to resolve the matter. 
110. His delegation, which still had full confidence in the Director General and the 
Secretariat and strongly endorsed the actions taken by them in discharging their 
responsibilities impartially and objectively, believed that the DPRK should reconsider its 
position and comply fully with its obligations under the safeguards agreement by allowing 
the Agency to carry out unrestricted ad hoc and routine inspection activities promptly and 
unconditionally so as to meet the minimum requirements of the agreement in ensuring the 
continuity of safeguards. It also believed that the DPRK should co-operate immediately with 
the Agency by complying fully with the relevant resolutions of the Board and the Security 
Council and that it should enter into meaningful and constructive consultations with the 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 21 


Agency with a view to resolving outstanding safeguards issues, including that of access to 
additional information and locations so as to clarify the inconsistencies. 


111. If the DPRK continued to refuse to co-operate with the Agency, the international 
community would be forced to take disciplinary measures. The DPRK should therefore 
pursue meaningful dialogue and consultations in good faith with the parties directly 
concerned, as called upon by the Board of Governors and the Security Council. 
112. Early and full implementation of the South-North agreement on the denuclearization 
of the Korean Peninsula was also essential in order to resolve the outstanding issues 
surrounding the DPRK's suspected nuclear programme. His delegation hoped that the DPRK 
would return to the negotiating table soon so that there could be a joint move towards mutual 
confidence and transparency and the early creation of a nuclear-weapon-free Korean 
Peninsula. 
113. Mr. MONDINO (Argentina) said that the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and the DPRK continued to be in force and that therefore all its provisions should 
be implemented. However, the Government of the DPRK continued to obstruct the full 
implementation of the agreement by preventing the Agency from carrying out routine 
inspections, from being present during the refuelling of the 5 MW(e) reactor and from 
clarifying the inconsistencies between the initial inventory declaration and the Agency's 
findings. 
114. He urged the Government of the DPRK to modify its attitude and stressed that full 
implementation of the safeguards agreement was essential in order to ensure the transparency 
of the DPRK's nuclear activities. 
115. The PRESIDENT, noting that several delegates, in their statements, had 
referred to the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090, said he would now 
ask the delegate of Canada to introduce it. 
116. Mr. CHEN (China) said that the draft resolution should not be introduced until 
the general discussion had been completed. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 22 


117. The PRESIDENT said that he saw no reason why the general discussion 
should not be combined with consideration of the draft resolution and that he would 
accordingly give the floor to the delegate of Canada. 
118. Mr. WALKER (Canada) said that the draft resolution dealt with a situation 
which, in the view of most Member States, constituted the most serious issue before the 
Agency. The DPRK's failure to respect its legal obligations towards the Agency and the 
international community represented a threat to the integrity of the safeguards regime. It 
was therefore both necessary and appropriate that that issue be addressed in the General 
Conference, a forum in which the full membership of the Agency was represented. 
119. The preambular paragraphs of the resolution were designed to summarize the history 
of the Agency's many attempts to fulfil its verification role in the DPRK. The full chronicle 
of events was set out in the report by the Director General attached to document 
GC(XXXVII)/1084, and in that connection he wished to draw attention to the DPRK's 
persistent unwillingness to co-operate fully with Agency inspectors or to enter into real 
consultations with Agency officials. 
120. The third preambular paragraph referred to the fact that, after the Board of Governors 
had determined that the DPRK was non-compliant with its obligations, the issue had been 
referred to the Security Council, which remained seized of the question. 
121. The operative paragraphs reflected the fact that the Director General and the 
Secretariat enjoyed the full confidence of the co-sponsors, who urged the DPRK to cooperate 
immediately with the Agency so that the safeguards agreement could be fully 
implemented. There was still time, even at that late stage, for proper co-operation to be 
established and the integrity of the safeguards regime to be preserved. 
122. Mr. BALANESCU (Romania), observing that all the discussions in the Board 
and the Security Council on the issue under consideration and the associated resolutions had 
proved fruitless, expressed concern that the DPRK was still failing to comply with its 
obligations under NPT and its safeguards agreement with the Agency. Moreover, the DPRK 
had not demonstrated any will to co-operate with the Agency and remedy a situation which 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 23 


seemed to be getting worse. That was why Romania was a co-sponsor of the draft 
resolution. 

123. Mr. AAMODT (Norway) said that his delegation regretted that the Agency 
had been unable to verify the correctness and assess the completeness of the DPRK's initial 
report and that the consultations with the DPRK had been of no avail. 
124. Norway fully supported the efforts of the Agency to carry out its safeguards duties 
in the DPRK and urged the DPRK to resume consultations with the Agency with a view to 
achieving full implementation of the safeguards agreement without delay. 
125. Mr. KUME (Japan) reaffirmed the continuing support of his delegation for the 
actions taken by the Director General in implementing the safeguards agreement with the 
DPRK and expressed its appreciation of the efforts made by the Governments of the United 
States and the Republic of Korea, through their respective bilateral dialogues with the DPRK, 
to support the consultations between the Agency and the DPRK. 
126. His delegation was gravely concerned about the fact that the inconsistencies between 
the DPRK's initial report and the Agency's findings remained unresolved, especially as the 
DPRK still refused to provide the access to additional information or locations which might 
help clear up the matter. Moreover, the DPRK seemed intent on limiting inspection activities 
to the minimum necessary for the maintenance and replacement of safeguards equipment. 
127. Japan shared the view of the Secretariat that, as the DPRK had suspended its 
withdrawal from the NPT, its safeguards agreement with the Agency was still in force. The 
DPRK was therefore under a legal obligation to fulfil all the requirements laid down in the 
safeguards agreement and not just some of them. 
128. Regrettably, essential elements of the Board's resolutions on the matter and of 
Security Council resolution 825 had thus far not been implemented. His delegation therefore 
hoped that the DPRK would respond positively to the latest Agency request and agree to 
routine and ad hoc inspection activities, as specified in its telex of 8 September, as soon as 
possible. He appealed to the DPRK to make a serious effort to resolve all the difficulties 
in the next round of consultations, to be held shortly in Vienna. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 24 


129. Mr. SALAS BARAHONA (Peru), expressing support for the draft resolution, 
said Peru believed that the NPT and an effective safeguards system were fundamental to 
world peace and security and the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, and he trusted that 
all other Member States thought that way. 
130. Mr. GUTIERREZ LEYTON (Chile) said that the draft resolution before the 
Conference related to a situation which was serious and which could set an unfortunate 
precedent. Chile supported the actions taken by the Secretariat and the Director General, 
and it hoped the DPRK would soon resume consultations with the Agency in a positive spirit. 
131. Mr. COOK (New Zealand) said that his country harboured no malice towards 
the DPRK, but it could not accept that the implementation of a safeguards agreement should 
be subject to negotiations or conditions. 
132. His delegation, which was deeply concerned lest the present situation undermine the 
integrity of Agency safeguards and of the non-proliferation regime as a whole, endorsed the 
actions taken by the Secretariat and the Board and hoped that the DPRK would co-operate 
fully in the implementation of its safeguards undertakings. 
133. New Zealand hoped that the DPRK would heed the views of the Conference, that it 
would, as a matter of urgency, agree to the routine and ad hoc inspections which were 
essential for maintaining safeguards continuity, and that it would enter promptly into genuine 
consultations aimed at resolving outstanding issues. 
134. Mr. HGBERG (Sweden) said it was a matter of deep concern to his country 
that the DPRK continued to be in non-compliance with its obligations under its safeguards 
agreement. Noting that the DPRK had declined to permit routine and ad hoc inspections, 
he urged the DPRK to co-operate fully with the Agency regarding necessary inspection 
activities, to fulfil all its obligations under the safeguards agreement and to abide by the 
resolutions adopted by the Board of Governors and the Security Council. He expressed his 
delegation's full support for the Director General, commended him and the Secretariat for 
their impartial efforts to implement the safeguards agreement and expressed the hope that 
positive results would be achieved soon through consultations between the DPRK and the 
Agency. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 25 


135. Mr. OJANEN (Finland) said Finland was gravely concerned at the DPRK's 
continued failure to discharge its safeguards obligations. Moreover, the DPRK's noncompliance 
had now extended to routine and ad hoc inspections, thus jeopardizing the 
continuity of safeguards. He urged the DPRK to comply with the relevant Board and 
Security Council resolutions, endorsed the action taken by the Board and expressed full 
support for the Agency in its efforts to implement the safeguards agreement. 
136. Mr. CONSTENLA (Costa Rica), commending the Secretariat for its efforts 
in endeavouring to implement the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the DPRK, 
said that Costa Rica, which had no army, depended on the proper functioning of international 
institutions and could not stand back and allow the Agency to lose its credibility. 
Accordingly, Costa Rica urged the DPRK to collaborate with the international community 
without delay in settling the matter under consideration. 
137. Mr. PEYRAT (Paraguay) expressed his country's disquiet at the dangerous 
situation arising from the non-compliance of the DPRK with its safeguards agreement and 
called on the DPRK to discharge its NPT obligations. The Agency should intensify its 
efforts with a view to achieving compliance and thereby avoiding a precedent that would 
undermine the universality and effectiveness of NPT. 
138. Mr. AL-SULEIMAN (Saudi Arabia) appealed to the DPRK to respect its 
commitments and co-operate fully with the Agency in resolving the safeguards issue. 
139. Mr. ORJUELA BERMEO (Colombia) said that, while still hoping that a 
peaceful solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean Peninsula could be found through 
constructive dialogue, he was dismayed at the DPRK's assertion that the draft resolution was 
a provocation and a threat to its sovereignty. It was nothing of the sort; it was simply a 
further attempt to achieve the implementation of contractual obligations - the basis of 
international law and peaceful coexistence. 
140. Ms. OK (Turkey), expressing concern at the lack of progress in the 
negotiations between the Agency and the DPRK, urged the DPRK to fulfil its NPT 
obligations and said that the issue should be dealt with through a multilateral dialogue 
between the Agency, the DPRK, the United States and the Republic of Korea. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 26 


141. Mr. SHEARAR (South Africa) said that the decision of his country to cosponsor 
the draft resolution had been motivated by its commitment to the safeguards regime 
and by general concern for peace and security; South Africa would have taken such a 
decision whichever country had been found to be in breach of its contractual undertakings. 
142. His country, which had confidence in the objectivity of the Director General and the 
Secretariat, hoped that the DPRK would co-operate in resolving the differences which had 
arisen and comply fully with its international safeguards obligations. 
143. The PRESIDENT asked whether the Conference wished to adopt the draft 
resolution in document GC(XXXVII)/1090. 
144. Mr. KIM (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) requested that a roll-call 
vote be taken on the draft resolution. 
145. Mr. CHEN (China) said that China could not support the draft resolution for 
the following reasons. First, it had not been necessary to put the issue on the agenda in the 
first place, and adopting the resolution would be a redundant act. Second, China had its own 
position on the resolutions of the Board of Governors and the Security Council mentioned 
in the draft resolution. Third, the phrase "widened the area of non-compliance" in the 
second operative paragraph and the follow-up action envisaged in the final operative 
paragraph of the draft resolution were not helpful and could only exacerbate the differences 
between the parties. 
146. In the light of those considerations, China might well have voted against the draft 
resolution but, as a gesture of goodwill, reciprocating that demonstrated by the sponsoring 
countries, China would abstain. 
147. Mr. BAKSHI (India) said that once a country had concluded an agreement it 
should meet its commitments thereunder. 
148. As far as implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the 
DPRK was concerned, some progress had been made and discussions had taken place 
between DPRK and other interested countries. Important issues remained unresolved, 
however, and that was a matter for concern. India had consistently taken the position that 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 27 


the differences between the parties to the agreement could be overcome only through 
negotiation and hoped the negotiating process would continue. Adoption of the draft 
resolution before the Conference might hamper that process, and his delegation had 
accordingly decided to abstain in any vote. 


149. Ms. KSENTTNI (Algeria) said her delegation supported the basic objective of 
the draft resolution - namely, to support the Director General in implementing the safeguards 
agreement with the DPRK, without preventing a constructive dialogue capable of resolving 
the differences between the Agency and the DPRK and of paving the way to the 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
150. Her delegation, which had supported the Board resolutions on the issue, would vote 
in favour of the draft resolution before the Conference, although it felt that there might be 
more pragmatic ways of achieving the desired end. 
151. Mr. JOSHUA (Pakistan) said his delegation would abstain in the vote because 
it believed the issue should be resolved through consultations between the Agency and the 
DPRK; he hoped that talks would be resumed soon in a constructive spirit. Other Member 
States of the Agency should use their good offices in helping to achieve a negotiated 
settlement. 
152. Pakistan, which was committed to the goal of non-proliferation, had always 
encouraged any effort made by countries - either individually or regionally - to advance the 
cause of non-proliferation. Accordingly, it had welcomed the declaration made by the 
Republic of Korea and the DPRK in favour of the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
153. Pakistan remained unwavering in its view that international agreements freely entered 
into should be scrupulously adhered to. Accordingly, all safeguards agreements, including 
that between the Agency and the DPRK, should be meticulously implemented by the parties. 
154. The PRESIDENT said the Conference would now proceed with a roll-call vote 
on the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090, as requested by the 
delegate of the DPRK. 
155. Guatemala, having been drawn bv lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 28 


156. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Jordan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Lebanon, 
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, 
Nigeria, Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, 
Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Venezuela. 


Against: Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya. 


Abstaining: Bangladesh, China, Cuba, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Namibia, Pakistan, Syrian Arab Republic, United Republic of 
Tanzania, Viet Nam, Zimbabwe. 


157. There were 72 votes in favour and 2 against, with 11 abstentions. The draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1090 was adopted. 


158. Mr. LI (Democratic People's Republic of Korea) said that his delegation very 
much regretted the adoption of the unjust resolution directed against its country, which it 


regarded as a violation of the DPRK's sovereignty and which it firmly rejected. The co


sponsors of the resolution and the officials of the Agency's Secretariat involved in its 

adoption would bear full responsibility for the consequences. If the delegate of the Republic 

of Korea really wanted the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, he should have 

demanded that the United States withdraw its nuclear threat against the DPRK. 

159. Mr. TARMIDZI (Indonesia) said that his delegation had voted in favour of the 
draft resolution because it believed that openness and transparency were essential in the area 

of safeguards. Adoption of the resolution should not be regarded as a form of political 

pressure; the resolution should be implemented in an impartial and objective manner. His 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.361 
page 29 


delegation hoped that, with the adoption of the resolution, dialogue and further negotiations 
would be resumed in the near future with a view to finding solutions acceptable to all parties. 


The meeting rose at 1.15 p.m. 



GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
22 October 1993 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


THIRTY-SEVENTH (1993) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE THREE HUNDRED AND SIXTY-SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 1 October 1993, at 3.15 p.m. 
President: Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

24 The denuclearization of Africa 1-22 
25 Implementation of United Nations Security Council 

resolutions 687, 707 and 715 relating to Iraq 23 - 66 
26 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 67 - 107 
27 Examination of delegates'credentials 108-112 
28 Appointment of the External Auditor 113-115 
29 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 116 - 117 
30 Report on Voluntary Contributions pledged to the 

Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1994 118 - 120 
Closing of the session 121 - 128 

[*] GC(XXXVII)/1085. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVII)/INF/328/Rev.2. 
93-3856 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three working days of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 
AFRANPTNWFZTACF 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear-weapon-free zone 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 3 


THE DENUCLEARIZATION OF AFRICA (GC(XXXVI)/RES/577; GC(XXXVII)/1075, 
1088) 


1. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/577, adopted by the General Conference at its previous 
session. As requested in operative paragraph 2 of that resolution, the Director General had 
submitted a report, contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1075, on the progress made with 
the implementation of the resolution. That report had already been considered by the Board 
of Governors during its meetings the week before. In addition, the Director General had 
referred to the issue in his opening statement to the Conference, and a draft resolution had 
been submitted on behalf of the African Group in document GC(XXXVII)/1088, which he 
invited the delegate of Ethiopia to introduce. 
2. Mr. YIMER (Ethiopia), speaking on behalf of the African Group, said it was 
a great honour to introduce the draft resolution, which was straightforward and clear. It 
contained two main elements: the first related to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in Africa, and the second to South Africa's nuclear programmes. Both elements were 
interdependent. The draft resolution recognized the positive developments in South Africa's 
nuclear activities and welcomed the progress which had been made with the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. It also requested South Africa to continue its 
stated policy. He hoped that the draft resolution would promote the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and that the Conference would adopt it by consensus. 
3. Mr. PLUG (Netherlands) supported the draft resolution and highlighted the 
general appreciation which had been shown by many delegations for South Africa's openness 
about its nuclear activities, which was perhaps not sufficiently reflected in the draft 
resolution. That transparency had greatly contributed to the prospect of an African continent 
free of nuclear weapons. The Government of the Netherlands was following developments 
in South Africa closely, and looked forward to the point when South Africa would once again 
be participating in all the Agency's activities. 
4. Mr. HULSE (United Kingdom) associated himself with the statement made by 
the delegate of the Netherlands. He supported the draft resolution but found the language 
rather uncharitable, particularly concerning South Africa's declaration that it had voluntarily 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 4 


destroyed its nuclear weapons - a momentous decision which he hoped would be imitated by 
other States. 

5. Mr. de LA FORTELLE (France) said his delegation also supported the draft 
resolution and appreciated the efforts which had been made by the South African 
Government. The new attitude of that Government should enable South Africa to resume 
participation in all the Agency's activities within the near future, and should also facilitate 
the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the African continent. 
6. Mr. McRAE (Canada) congratulated the South African Government on its 
policy of openness and co-operation with the Agency and the international nuclear 
community. The actions of the South African Government had greatly contributed to the 
strengthening of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. For the first time in the 
history of the IAEA, a country with a previously active nuclear weapons programme had 
decided to suspend that programme and adopt a policy of full transparency. 
7. The progress made over the preceding few years on the resolution which the 
Conference was considering had been most gratifying. The prospect of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in Africa was much closer to becoming a reality than anyone would have thought 
possible only a few years previously. It was regrettable that the draft resolution as it stood 
did not contain an invitation to South Africa to rejoin all the Agency's activities. While 
supporting the draft resolution submitted by the African Group, therefore, he looked forward 
to further progress over the course of the coming year. 
8. Mr. WALKER (Australia) said that his country strongly supported the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and accordingly welcomed South 
Africa's voluntary abandonment of its nuclear weapons activities and its adoption of a policy 
of transparency and co-operation with the IAEA. He was therefore able to endorse the draft 
resolution. He also welcomed the other positive political developments which were taking 
place in South Africa and hoped that the new South Africa would soon be taking its rightful 
place in all international bodies. 
9. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium) expressed himself very much in favour of the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and welcomed the progress which had 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 5 


been made in the preceding year. South Africa had contributed to that progress and had 
clearly demonstrated its wish to co-operate fully with the Agency. He hoped that positive 
trend would continue and looked forward to a point where South Africa would resume its 
participation in all the Agency's activities. 

10. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) said that real progress had been 
made during the preceding year towards drawing up a comprehensive treaty for the 
denuclearization of Africa. The United States, having long supported the establishment of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, endorsed the draft resolution and would continue to 
follow developments in that area with great interest. Her delegation hoped in particular that 
South Africa would soon be able to participate fully in activities relating to the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy at the regional and international levels. 
11. The United States commended the Government of South Africa on its co-operative 
attitude - which incidentally it would have liked to see better reflected in the text of the draft 
resolution. South Africa's commitment to implementing full transparency with regard to the 
nuclear weapons programme which it had conducted and dismantled prior to its accession to 
the NPT was especially gratifying. South Africa's actions could and should serve as an 
important model for other countries wishing to turn away from nuclear weapon programmes 
and establish full international confidence in their commitment to nuclear non-proliferation. 
12. Mr. SHEARAR (South Africa) said that his delegation was greatly 
disappointed by the text of the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1088, 
as it signally failed to reflect fully the events which had taken place in South Africa during 
the preceding year and which were partly described in document GC(XXXVII)/1075, as well 
as the reaction to those events from the international community at large, the Board of 
Governors during its meetings the preceding week, and many speakers in the general debate 
and even in the discussion of the item during the current meeting. The draft resolution also 
did not reflect the current state of bilateral relations. Indeed, the recognition it gave South 
Africa could at best be described as miserly. 
13. Equally importantly, it left unresolved certain outstanding limitations on the 
relationship between South Africa and the Agency which also had an impact on the work of 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 6 


the Secretariat. The use of South African facilities in the implementation of Agency and 
other training programmes in Africa was but a small example. 


14. With a view to remedying that defect and ensuring that the draft resolution reflected 
greater credit on the General Conference, he would propose adding, in operative paragraph 2 
after the words "full transparency", the clause "and invites it to resume full participation in 
the work of the Agency". 
15. Under the circumstances, his delegation wished to make it clear that South Africa's 
support for the operative part of the draft resolution was limited to those paragraphs which 
related to a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. South Africa would, in pursuance of its 
declared policy of transparency, continue to meet in full its obligations as a Member State 
of the IAEA, as well as its commitments under the NPT and under its safeguards agreement 
with the Agency. However, equally in the interests of transparency, his delegation would 
have to consult with the South African authorities concerning any negative implications which 
the adoption of the draft resolution might have for South Africa's voluntary contributions 
toward the Agency's technical and regional co-operation activities. Pending the outcome of 
those consultations, South Africa could not be bound by any voluntary pledges it had made 
either to the TACF or to AFRA. He did not in any way wish to imply that the resolution 
would affect the promotion of bilateral relations with South Africa's neighbours. As in the 
past, South Africa would be prepared to consider reasonable bilateral proposals, guided by 
its belief in the development of peaceful nuclear technology and research in Africa. 
However, its first priority would have to be its own interests and domestic requirements for 
economic development. 
16. Thus, South Africa could not join any consensus on the current text. 
17. Mr. MENDEN (Germany) said that his delegation supported the draft 
resolution and, like many other delegations, appreciated South Africa's decision to dismantle 
its nuclear weapons. That decision was a historical move which had contributed greatly to 
the efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. He looked forward to the point 
when South Africa would once more be participating fully in the Agency's activities. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 7 


18. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said his delegation had always 
supported the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones and his country had been the first to 
propose the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. He therefore 
welcomed South Africa's declaration that it had dismantled its nuclear weapons and was 
submitting its nuclear installations to Agency safeguards. That move constituted real 
progress which, it was to be hoped, would eventually lead to the establishment of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in Africa. 
19. The PRESIDENT, there being no further speakers, took it that the Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1088 without a 
vote. 
20. It was so decided. 
21. Mr. BAKSHI (India) expressed his full support for the aspirations of the 
people of Africa to secure equality and lasting peace in their part of the world. For decades, 
India had consistently supported the just struggle of the people of Africa. He welcomed the 
momentous positive developments which had taken place in South Africa in recent years, and 
applauded the progress towards full participatory democracy. 
22. The resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1088 referred to the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the continent of Africa. His delegation had a clearly 
defined position on the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones, namely that any such proposal 
should emanate from the region concerned, that it should evolve from consultations and 
negotiations among the States of the region, and that it should be based upon the consent of 
all the States in the region. He noted that the States in the African region were working 
towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone and that, at their request, the 
Director General of the IAEA had been assisting them in their efforts. His delegation was 
therefore able to go along with the resolution. He also expressed the hope that South Africa 
would be able to participate fully in all the Agency's activities in the not too distant future. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 8 


IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS 
687, 707 AND 715 RELATING TO IRAQ (GC(XXXVI)/RES/579; GOV/2677GC(
XXXVII)/1069 and Add.l, GC(XXXVII)/1091 and Add.l and 2) 

23. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/579, which had been adopted by the General Conference 
during its preceding session. Pursuant to operative paragraph 5 of that resolution, the 
Director General had submitted, in document GOV/2677-GC(XXXVII)/1069, a report on his 
efforts to implement Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 which had also been 
considered by the Board during its meetings the preceding week. In addition, the Director 
General had referred to the matter in his opening statement, and a draft resolution on the 
issue was before the Conference in GC(XXXVII)/1091. 
24. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) appealed to all delegates to set aside any political 
considerations and discuss the issue on its own merits. 
25. The item related to the implementation of Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 
715. Those resolutions had been adopted by the Security Council under the terms of Chapter 
VII of the United Nations Charter. Chapter VII of the United Nations Charter gave the 
Security Council a wide variety of options as far as the enforcement of its resolutions was 
concerned. 
26. Paragraph 13 of Security Council resolution 687 charged the Director General of the 
Agency with a special task which was clearly defined in the resolution. That task had been 
laid upon the Director General and not upon the Agency, and the former had been made 
responsible to the Security Council for the carrying out of that task. He had used an action 
team to perform the task and had not involved the Department of Safeguards. He was not 
required to seek permission from the Board of Governors or the General Conference for any 
of the activities relating to that task. 
27. During its preceding session, the General Conference had discussed an item entitled 
"Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards obligations". That topic came within the 
Agency's field of competence. The item on the agenda for the current session, on the other 
hand, dealt with the implementation of Security Council resolutions, which was not a matter 
that fell within the Agency's field of competence. Therefore the General Conference could 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 9 


only listen to the Director General's report; it could not discuss the issue or take a decision 
on it. In case anyone disagreed with that view, he requested that a legal opinion be given 
on the matter. 


28. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference to proceed with its deliberations on 
the issue pending the delivery of an opinion by the Legal Division. 
29. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) proposed that all discussion of the issue be suspended 
pending the delivery of a legal opinion. 
30. The PRESIDENT ruled that discussion of the issue should continue and invited 
the French delegation to introduce the draft resolution on the matter. 
31. Mr. de LA FORTELLE (France) said that the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXVII)/1091 expressed the concerns of a great number of countries and that 
the delegations of Romania and Ireland had asked to be added to the long list of co-sponsors. 
32. The central message of the draft resolution was that some progress had been made 
with the implementation of the Security Council resolutions, but that certain essential 
elements had still to be implemented. 
33. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq), interrupting the representative of France, said that the 
Conference was engaged in an illegal procedure and should suspend its discussion of the 
present issue until the legal opinion he had requested was forthcoming. 
34. The PRESIDENT replied that discussion of the issue would continue until the 
Legal Division was ready to deliver an opinion. 
35. Mr. de LA FORTELLE (France), resuming his introductory statement, said 
that since some elements of the Security Council resolutions had still not been implemented, 
the draft resolution called upon Iraq to comply fully with its obligations. The vigilance of 
the international community had to be maintained, especially in view of the recent peace 
developments in the region. The resolution also commended the efforts of the Director 
General and the Secretariat. 
36. In conclusion, he stressed that the resolution had been drawn up in a constructive 
manner. It had attracted wide support, and he hoped that it would be adopted by consensus. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 10 


37. The DIRECTOR GENERAL noted that, although Security Council 
resolution 687 laid the responsibility for the implementation of that resolution upon the 
Director General of the Agency, subsequent resolutions, such as resolution 707, spoke 
directly about the IAEA (for example in paragraph 3). Thus it was clear that the Security 
Council had mandated tasks to the Agency. Moreover, Article VII.B of the Statute stated 
that the Director General was "under the authority of and subject to the control of the Board 
of Governors". Therefore, even though the Security Council had mandated a task to him, 
he was still answerable to the Board and to the Agency. Equally, the Board was always free 
to report on its deliberations to the General Conference, and Article V.D of the Statute stated 
that: 
"The General Conference may discuss any questions or any matters within the scope 
of this Statute or relating to the powers and functions of any organs provided for in 
this Statute, and may make recommendations to the membership of the Agency or to 
the Board of Governors or to both on any such questions or matters." 


38. It was, of course, up to the General Conference to decide whether it had the authority 
to adopt a resolution on the issue, but he was of the opinion that it did have that authority. 
39. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) expressed her country's full support 
and appreciation for the Agency's continuing efforts to implement its responsibilities in Iraq 
pursuant to the relevant Security Council resolutions. Under the effective leadership of 
Professor Maurizio Zifferero, those efforts had succeded in alleviating concerns regarding 
any remaining capability in Iraq to produce nuclear weapons. The Agency's activities must 
be pursued vigorously in order to maintain a high level of confidence that Iraq was not 
attempting to reconstitute its illegal nuclear weapons programme. 
40. Iraq had so far refused to co-operate fully with the Agency and the United Nations 
Special Commission in meeting the requirements of the Security Council resolutions. 
Consequently, the United States of America was pleased to co-sponsor the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1091, which demanded that Iraq immediately comply 
with all its obligations under Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 - particularly by 
providing to the Security Council the answers to questions about its foreign suppliers and 
sources of technical advice. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 11 


41. Mr. MENDEN (Germany) said that under resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/579, 
adopted by the General Conference the previous year, the Director General clearly had both 
the authority and the obligation to report to the General Conference on the Agency's efforts 
to implement Security Council resolution 687. The matter had therefore rightly been put on 
the agenda and Germany fully supported the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1091. 
42. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) thanked the Director General for the opinion he had 
given and explained that while he had no objection to the Director General reporting to the 
General Conference, he considered that the General Conference did not have the legal 
authority to adopt resolutions giving the false impression that it could assist the Security 
Council in implementing its own resolutions. To do so was sheer hypocrisy and constituted 
a meaningless political exercise. Only the Security Council had the authority to speed up 
implementation of its resolutions. Discussions were currently taking place in Baghdad at 
which a great deal of information was being provided, so it was even possible that many of 
the open questions - including those referred to by the representative of the United States had 
already been answered. 
43. Turning to the draft resolution, he pointed out that preambular paragraph (b), 
referring to Iraq's non-compliance with its safeguards obligations towards the Agency, had 
already been discussed the previous year and the year before that and had no direct relevance 
to implementation of Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. As to operative 
paragraph 1 demanding full compliance in submitting a full, final and complete declaration 
of Iraq's nuclear programme, Iraq had submitted such a declaration in March 1992. The 
response had been a series of questions from the Agency's Action Team - all of which had 
been answered. Nevertheless, the Action Team had maintained that not all the information 
had been supplied. At the high-level technical talks which had taken place in New York in 
early September 1993, Iraq had provided further information, and it had subsequently 
updated the appendices to Security Council resolution 707. Document 
GC(XXXVII)/1069/Add.l, which contained the minutes of those meetings in New York, 
made no mention of any information being missing in the full, final and complete declaration. 
It was missing only in the minds of those who had written draft resolution 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 12 


GC(XXXVII)/1091, which was neither factual nor precise. Clearly the aim of that draft 
resolution was to perpetuate the issue for political purposes. 


44. The claim that Iraq had not accepted ongoing inspections was false. The Director 
General himself had said that the stage of ongoing inspections was now in progress. 
Equipment, such as gamma sensors, had been installed, water samples collected and analyses 
made as part of the ongoing inspections. Iraq was co-operating fully with the Agency in that 
respect, but anyone thinking that the attitude reflected in the draft resolution under discussion 
was conducive to that process was under a grave misapprehension. 
45. Accordingly, he formally proposed that preambular paragraph (b) and operative 
paragraph 1 of the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1091 be deleted and 
requested that separate roll-call votes be taken on those two deletions and on the text as a 
whole. 
46. Mr. TAN (Malaysia) said that his country could go along with the draft 
resolution provided it was, in fact, legally correct for the matter to be discussed by the 
General Conference. Having taken note of the Director General's opinion on the subject, 
he proposed that a vote be taken on whether the Conference was competent to discuss and 
take a decision on the matter. 
47. The PRESIDENT, referring to Rule 64 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference, suggested that a roll-call vote should first be taken on the competence 
of the General Conference to discuss and take a decision on the draft resolution submitted. 
48. Indonesia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
49. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Costa 
Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, 
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, 
Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, 
Mongolia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, 
Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, 
Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 13 


Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, 
United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, Zambia. 


Against: Jordan. 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, India, 
Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia. 


50. There were 68 votes in favour and 1 against, with 7 abstentions. The General 
Conference was competent to discuss and take a decision in respect of the draft resolution. 
51. The PRESIDENT recalled that the delegate of Iraq had proposed two 
amendments to the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1091, namely 
deletion of preambular paragraph (b) and deletion of operative paragraph 1. He had also 
requested that separate roll-call votes be taken on each of those two amendments and on the 
text as a whole. 
52. Ms. BECKER (United States of America), referring to Rule 75 of the Rules 
of Procedure, objected to the request made by the delegate of Iraq. 
53. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that Rule 75 was not applicable since he was not 
asking for a separate vote on each part of the draft resolution but for separate votes on two 
amendments. 
54. The PRESIDENT suggested that the General Conference should comply with 
Iraq's request for three separate votes and a roll-call vote on whether to delete preambular 
paragraph (b) of the draft resolution as proposed by Iraq. A vote in favour would signify 
being in favour of deletion of the paragraph. 
55. 
Zambia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
56. 
The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: None. 
Against: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 14 


Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great 
Briatin and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, 
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia. 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Jordan. 


57. There were no votes in favour and 74 against, with 4 abstentions. The proposal to 
delete preambular paragraph (b) was rejected. 


58. Mr. VILAIN XIIII (Belgium), noting that under Rule 63 of the Rules of 
Procedure the President was not obliged to allow the amendments proposed by Iraq to be 


discussed or put to the vote, suggested that the President should invite the Conference to 


proceed directly to a vote on the draft resolution itself, since the Iraqi proposals were clearly 


intended to prolong the session rather than to advance discussion. 


59. The PRESIDENT replied that since the Conference had already embarked on 
taking the three votes requested by Iraq, he felt it should now proceed with a roll-call vote 

on whether to delete operative paragraph 1 of the draft resolution as proposed by Iraq. A 

vote in favour would signify being in favour of deletion of the paragraph. 

60. Armenia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
In the absence of a representative of Armenia, the voting started with Australia. 

61. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: None. 

Against: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, 
Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, 
Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 15 


Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, 
Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Islamic 
Republic of Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of 
Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, 
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russian 
Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom of Great 
Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, 
United States of America, Uruguay, Venezuela, Zambia. 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Jordan. 


62. There were no votes in favour and 74 against, with 4 abstentions. The proposal to 
delete operative paragraph 1 was rejected. 


63. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference to proceed to a roll-call vote 
on the text of the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1091 as a whole. 

64. Pakistan, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
65. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, 
Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, 
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, 
Iceland, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Ireland, 
Israel, Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, 
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Namibia, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, 
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovak Republic, 
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, Zambia. 

Against: None. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 16 


Abstaining: Algeria, Cuba, Democratic People's Republic of Korea, 
Jordan. 


66. There were 73 votes in favour and none against, with 4 abstentions. The draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1091 was adopted. 


APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST 
(GC(XXXVI)/RES/601; GOV/2682-GC(XXXVII)/1072 and GC(XXXVII)/1086) 

67. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/601, adopted by the General Conference at its 1992 session. 

Pursuant to operative paragraph 7 of that resolution, the Director General had submitted the 

report contained in document GOV/2682-GC(XXXVII)/1072, which had already been 

considered by the Board of Governors the previous week. The Director General had also 

referred to the matter in his opening statement to the Conference. 

68. In addition, a draft resolution had been submitted in document GC(XXXVII)/1086 on 
which there had since been intensive consultations between himself, the sponsors and other 

interested parties. As a result, an amended version had been circulated in which the original 

operative paragraph 3 was replaced by the following two new operative paragraphs: 

"3. Calls upon all parties directly concerned to consider seriously taking the 
practical and appropriate steps required for the implementation of the proposal to 
establish a mutually and effectively verifiable NWFZ in the region, and invites the 
countries concerned to adhere to international non-proliferation regimes, particularly 
the nuclear non-proliferation regime, as a means of complementing participation in 
a zone free of all weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East and of 
strengthening peace and security in the region. 

"4. Takes note of the importance of the ongoing bilateral Middle East peace 
negotiations and the activities of the multilateral working group on Arms Control and 
Regional Security in promoting mutual confidence and security in the Middle East, 
including establishment of a NWFZ, and calls on the Director General, as requested 
by the participants, to render all necessary assistance to the working group in 
promoting that objective." 

69. If the amended version was accepted, the subsequent operative paragraphs 4 to 8 
would of course have to be renumbered accordingly. 


GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 17 


70. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Iran) expressed his delegation's reservations regarding 
the circulated amendment, which had implications that went beyond the Agency's mandate. 
71. Mr. HADDAD (Syrian Arab Republic) noted that the draft resolution, as set 
out in document GC(XXXVII)/1086, was essentially the same as the previous year's 
resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/601 except for tow new features: an addition in preambular 
paragraph (e) commending the Agency on various initiatives relating to the application of 
safeguards in the Middle East, and a new operative paragraph 3 which was the more 
important addition in that it invited all the countries of the region which had not yet done so 
to accede to the NPT. 
72. Regarding the circulated amendment, his delegation would have preferred to retain 
the original wording of paragraph 3 but was willing, for the sake of consensus, to go along 
with its replacement by the two new paragraphs proposed. 
73. As to the proposed new operative paragraph 4, his Government was not opposed in 
principle to setting up a multilateral or any other kind of working group, but felt that it 
would be premature to do so before the bilateral negotiations had achieved substantial 
progress in establishing peace and mutual understanding in the region. Such progress would 
be greatly facilitated if the region were free of all nuclear weapons and weapons of mass 
destruction or if at least all the countries of the region would adhere to the relevant 
instruments in order to promote mutual confidence. 
74. Mr. SALLOUKH (Lebanon) reaffirmed his country's desire for a just peace 
in the region, a goal which could not be attained unless all the parties concerned joined in 
the necessary efforts. 
75. A first step towards building mutual confidence would be for all the countries that had 
not yet done so to accede to the NPT and submit all their nuclear activities to Agency 
safeguards. A number of instances, including the Agency, were engaged in various 
initiatives aimed at achieving that goal with a view to bringing about a more humane society 
in the region guided by peace-loving principles rather than being ruled by the threat of mass 
destruction. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 18 


76. Lebanon would support a consensus on the replacement of operative paragraph 3 by 
the two new paragraphs. Its only proviso was that the efforts - albeit undoubtedly 
important - should be regarded as depending upon substantive progress being achieved in the 
bilateral negotiations. Such progress could be encouraged through accession to the NPT by 
all parties in the region and through the speeding up of the negotiations. Once those 
conditions had been fulfilled it would be reasonable to proceed to multilateral talks - a move 
his delegation looked forward to making, but only when the time was right. 
77. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said that his country had supported the efforts 
undertaken within the framework of the United Nations Security Council over a period of 
many years with a view to establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and 
had, moreover, advocated making the region free of all weapons of mass destruction, a view 
it had expressed clearly during the discussion on chemical weapons at the Paris Conference 
of States Parties to the 1925 Geneva Protocol, held in January 1989. 
78. Accession to the NPT by all the countries of the region was a prerequisite for 
achieving mutual confidence. Any contrary approach could only serve to intensify the arms 
race. It was well known, after all, that nuclear weapons were already present in the region, 
specifically in Israel. 
79. Among the obvious weak points of the draft resolution before the Conference was its 
failure to refer to Security Council resolution 487 (1981), which had been adopted 
unanimously and which called upon Israel to place its nuclear facilities under to the Agency's 
safeguards. The draft resolution also omitted any reference to operative paragraph 14 of 
Security Council resolution 687(1991), in which it was recognized that the actions to be taken 
by Iraq in accordance with that resolution represented steps towards the goal of establishing 
in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass destruction. 
80. Turning to the proposed amendment, he said that the new operative paragraph 4 
constituted an attempt to exclude from the sphere of competence of the United Nations the 
subjects of safeguards, their application in the Middle East and the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region, since it implied that those issued would be dealt 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 19 


with in negotiations in which not all the countries of the region were able to participate and 
in which no one country could act on behalf of another. 


81. His delegation would not, therefore, be in a position to vote in favour of the draft 
resolution, even if it had the right to do so. 
82. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) said that, in the light of recent 
developments which had raised hopes that a just, durable, secure and comprehensive peace 
could at long last be achieved in the Arab-Israeli conflict, her delegation was especially 
pleased to be able to join the consensus on the current year's resolution on the application 
of safeguards in the Middle East. 
83. That resolution reflected an important principle for promoting security in the region, 
namely that widely based international non-proliferation regimes, including in particular the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, could complement the achievement of regional goals. 
Moreover, if reinforced a regional goal that deserved - and indeed commanded - strong 
support by the parties directly concerned - a Middle East free of all weapons of mass 
destruction, including nuclear weapons. 
84. In addition, the draft resolution recognized the important role to be played in 
approaching that goal by the multilateral working group on Arms Control and Regional 
Security. Specifically, it cited the role of the working group in promoting a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the region and called upon the Director General and the Agency to assist in that 
effort. 
85. Taken together, those were tangible and important steps forward in the process of 
building confidence and security in the Middle East. In that connection, her Government 
particularly welcomed the constructive spirit of compromise that had produced such an 
encouraging outcome. 
86. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Iran) reiterated that his delegation, while in general 
considering that the draft resolution contained important elements for the application of 
safeguards in the Middle East, nevertheless had some reservations about the text. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 20 


87. Regarding preambular paragraph (d), he felt that, for the sake of avoiding ambiguity, 
the activities referred to in the phrase "recent initiatives regarding arms control in the region" 
should be defined in greater detail. 
88. The same comment applied to preambular paragraph (e): it would have been 
appropriate to give more detailed information regarding the States whose positive response 
was being commended. 
89. Turning to operative paragraph 3 in both the original and the amended version, he 
noted that the word "practical" seemed unnecessary and left the paragraph open to 
misinterpretation and misuse by those seeking to justify their reluctance to pursue the 
resolution's objectives. 
90. With those remarks, his delegation could support the draft resolution as set forth in 
document GC(XXXVII)/1086. It had greater difficulty, however, in accepting amendments 
which strayed into areas, such as arms control, that were beyond the Agency's mandate and 
merely diverted attention from issues of greater immediate relevance to its activities, namely 
the application of safeguards and the positive response forthcoming from the region with 
regard to the conclusion of full-scope safeguards agreements. 
91. The PRESIDENT said that, in the light of the comments made, he had the 
impression that the Conference was prepared to adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVII)/1086, as amended, without a vote. 
92. It was so decided. 
93. Mr. FRANK (Israel), explaining his country's position, said that Israel had 
joined the consensus over the resolution because, in its amended version, it included some 
important and positive elements. 
94. Israel's policy on the nuclear issue was based on four principles, the first being that 
of comprehensiveness: the nuclear issue should be addressed within the context of the entire 
peace process including all regional security problems, both conventional and nonconventional. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 21 


95. The second principle concerned the regional framework: nuclear non-proliferation 
could be achieved only by establishing a mutually verifiable nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. 
96. The third principle was that of a step-by-step approach: for reasons of practicality, 
it was necessary to begin the process with confidence- and security-building measures, to 
establish peaceful relations and, in due course, to complement the process by tackling 
conventional and non-conventional arms control, assigning priority to systems that experience 
had shown to be destructive and destabilizing. 
97. The fourth principle was the primacy of the peace process: negotiation on all the 
issues related to the security of the region had to take place in a free and direct way - as was 
the case with the bilateral and multilateral talks - within the framework of the peace process. 
98. It was to be hoped that the consensus reached by the Conference on the present 
occasion, however modest, would contribute to the goodwill and moderation so necessary for 
all concerned to invest the crucial efforts without which the ongoing peace process could not 
be sustained. 
99. Finally, his delegation expected that the remnants of past animosity still to be seen 
in some of the Agency's resolutions would now be removed. 
100. Ms. OK (Turkey) expressed her delegation's gratification at the fact that the 
amended resolution had been adopted with the agreement of all the parties concerned. 
101. Her Government welcomed the recent developments in the Middle East which 
represented a stride towards a peaceful future for that region and the entire world. 
102. The presence of nuclear arms in some countries of the region was an issue that her 
country viewed within the context of the regional security of the Middle East rather than that 
of bilateral conflicts. 
103. Her Government trusted that the new environment in the Middle East would be 
conducive to the development of co-operation in the nuclear field in that region. It was to 
be hoped that, with the successful consummation of the peace process, a firm political will 
would evolve to make the Middle East a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 22 


104. Finally, she reaffirmed her Government's desire for as many countries as possible 
within Turkey's region to join the NPT as Turkey had done already. 
105. Mr. BAKSHI (India) recalled his country's consistent support for all efforts 
aimed at establishing comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East. India had 
welcomed all steps taken in that direction, particularly the momentous political developments 
of the past two months. India had also been a faithful and strong supporter of the just cause 
of the people of Palestine and continued to hope and pray for the further consolidation and 
expansion of the peace process in the Middle East. 
106. With respect to the resolution just adopted by the Conference, he emphasized a basic 
principle underlying the application of safeguards, namely that the Agency should conduct 
its activities in response to a request made by a State or States. The same applied to 
proposals to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in a region: any such proposal should 
emanate from the region concerned, should have the consent of all the States of the region, 
and should evolve as the result of negotiations among them. Similarly, every sovereign 
country had the right to decide which international agreement or agreements it wished to 
sign. 
107. In the case of the Middle East, it appeared that no State in the region had expressed 
reservations regarding the application of safeguards or the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the region, which could evidently be construed as implying consent. That was 
only his delegation, despite having reservations on certain elements of the resolution, had 
decided to go along with it for the sake of consensus. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXVII)/1098, 1099) 

108. The PRESIDENT drew attention to the General Committee's report on its 
meeting to examine delegates' credentials, contained in document GC(XXXVII)/1098. 
Paragraphs 2 to 12 of the report described the manner in which the Committee had 
approached its task and conveyed the opinions expressed during the discussion. The 
Committee had agreed to recommend that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in paragraph 13 of its report. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 23 


109. Mr. ALOWAIS (United Arab Emirates), on behalf of the Arab delegations 
members of the League of Arab States participating in the current session of the General 
Conference, read out the statement circulated as an Attachment to document 
GC(XXXVII)/1099 concerning those delegations' reservations in respect of the credentials 
submitted by the delegation of Israel. 
110. Ms. BECKER (United States of America) regretted that the issue of the Israeli 
delegation's credentials had been raised once again at the General Conference. Recent farreaching 
and positive developments in the Middle East, including the agreement signed 
recently by Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization, had made it seem inappropriate 
to express such reservations in respect of the credentials submitted by the delegation of 
Israel, which her delegation found to be in perfectly good order. Issues of the past should 
be left behind once and for all, and all efforts should be dedicated to contributing to a climate 
which would further the peace process. 
111. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference was prepared to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 13 of document GC(XXXVII)/1098. 
112. The draft resolution was adopted. 
APPOINTMENT OF THE EXTERNAL AUDITOR 

113. The PRESIDENT pointed out that the current term of office of the External 
Auditor, who was the Auditor General of Canada, would end when he had finished auditing 
the Agency's accounts for 1993; the Conference therefore needed to make an appointment 
at its current session to provide for the auditing of the accounts for 1994 and 1995. 
114. He had been informed that the Auditor General of Canada would be prepared to serve 
as the Agency's External Auditor for a further period of two years, and so he proposed that 
the General Conference appoint the Auditor General of Canada as External Auditor to audit 
the Agency's accounts for 1994 and 1995. 
115. The President's proposal was accepted. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 24 


ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


116. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was currently 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Hamada 
(Tunisia) and Ms. Schick (Australia) - with Mr. Khalifa (Egypt) and Mr. Myck 
(Luxembourg) as alternates. Mr. Khalifa being no longer available to serve on the 
Committee, he proposed that Mr. Campuzano Piria (Mexico) be elected to fill the vacancy 
as an alternate. 
117. Mr. Campuzano Pina fMexico) was elected as an alternate member of the Agency's 
Staff Pension Committee, with Mr. Hamada and Ms. Schick continuing to serve as members 
and Mr. Myck continuing to serve as an alternate. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVII)/1079/Rev.4) 

118. The PRESIDENT, drawing attention to document GC(XXXVII)/1079/Rev.4, 
said that by 6.30 p.m. on 30 September 1993, the voluntary contributions pledged by 
Member States to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1994 had reached a 
total of US $11 208 464. Since then, the Czech Republic had pledged $245 700, the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea $29 250 and Ghana $5000, thus bringing the total 
amount pledged for 1994 to $11 488 414. 
119. He hoped that all Members would pledge and also pay their full voluntary 
contributions to the TACF as early as possible in 1994, so that the objectives of the technical 
co-operation programme for the year could be carried out without any hindrance or 
uncertainty. 
120. Mr. SHEARAR (South Africa) regretted that the South African delegation, in 
view of the resolution adopted by the General Conference earlier on, was no longer in a 
position to recommend to its Government that the voluntary pledge of a contribution of 
US $122 850 to the TACF for 1994, made in good faith the previous week, be paid. He 
therefore requested that South Africa's name be included in document GC(XXXVII)/1079, 
as revised, with the majority of the Agency's Members which were not yet in a position to 
pledge a voluntary contribution. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 25 


CLOSING OF THE SESSION 


121. Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria), speaking on behalf of all delegations, expressed 
their warmest congratulations to the President for the skilful manner in which he had 
conducted the present session of the General Conference. The firmness, balance and 
sensitivity which he had displayed in the course of the proceedings had met all the 
expectations of member delegations. On behalf of the Nigerian delegation, and on behalf of 
all the delegates, he thanked the President profoundly. 
122. The PRESIDENT expressed his deep gratitude to all delegations for the 
confidence and trust they had shown by electing him. He deeply appreciated the spirit of cooperation 
which had prevailed throughout the discussions. That spirit had been demonstrated 
by all delegations and had been the hallmark of the Conference. 
123. On behalf of the Conference, he expressed appreciation to the Director General, the 
Vice-Presidents, the members of the General Committee, the Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole and his Vice-Chairmen, and, last but not least, all members of the Secretariat for 
their excellent preparations that had so facilitated the work of the Conference. 
124. On behalf of the conference, he also thanked the Austrian authorities and the City of 
Vienna for the traditional hospitality which had been enjoyed by all during the past week. 
125. He further wished to thank the interpreters, translators, precis-writers and printers for 
their valuable support, without which it would not have been possible to complete the work 
of the Conference. 
126. It was his sad duty to announce the death of Dr. Robert Patrick Baffour of Ghana, 
who had been President of the General Conference in 1962. Dr. Baffour had been a 
distinguished scholar who had made an important contribution to the development of nuclear 
science and technology in his home country as Vice-Chancellor of the Kwame Nkrumah 
University of Science and Technology, among the many other public offices he had held 
during his lifetime. On behalf of all participants, he wished to express to the Ghanaian 
authorities heartfelt condolences on the demise of Dr. Baffour. 

GC(XXXVII)/OR.362 
page 26 


127. Before closing the session, in accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he 
invited the delegations to observe a minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 


128. The President declared the thirty-seventh regular session of the General Conference 
closed. 
The meeting rose at 6.5 p.m. 


