GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
14 October 1994 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE TENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Friday, 23 September 1994, at 4.40 p.m. 


President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

19 The financing of technical assistance (resumed) 1 -4 
29 Examination of delegates' credentials 5-9 
31 Restoration of technical assistance to Israel 10-43 
28 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 44-65 
32 Report on voluntary contributions pledged to the 

Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 
1995 66-67 
Closing of the session 68-79 

GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 l/Rev.2. 

94-03904 (VIII) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 

page 2 

THE FINANCING OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE (GC(XXXVIII)/21, GC(XXXVIII)/36) 
(resumed) 

1. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/36. 
2. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIII)/36 was adopted. 
3. The PRESIDENT said that under the agenda item "The financing of technical 
assistance" he wished to raise a matter - technical assistance to areas under the jurisdiction 
of the Palestinian Authority - which had been the subject of wide and intensive consultations. 
After the satisfactory outcome of those consultations, he now wished to propose the following 
conclusion for endorsement by the Conference: 
"Based on my consultations, I believe that in view of the ongoing peace process in 
the Middle East and the establishment of the Palestinian Authority pursuant to the 
Cairo Agreement of 4 May 1994 between the PLO and Israel, it is the wish of the 
General Conference, as a contribution to the peace process and in line with actions 
of other organizations in the UN system and consistent with the aforementioned 
agreement, that the Board of Governors, through its Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Committee, identify technical assistance projects that could be 
implemented in the territories under the jurisdiction of the Palestinian Authority 
through appropriate international organizations." 

4. The Conference endorsed the conclusion proposed by the President. 
EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(XXXVIII)/32, GC(XXXVIII)/41) 

5. The PRESIDENT, drawing attention to the report - in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/41 - of the General Committee on its meeting to examine delegates' 
credentials, said that since the report had been issued credentials satisfying the requirements 
of Rule 27 of the Rules of Procedure had also been received from the United Arab Emirates. 
6. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, while his delegation 
endorsed the reservations expressed by Arab delegations in document GC(XXXVIII)/32 
concerning the credentials of the Israeli delegate, its objections were based principally on its 
non-recognition of the regime occupying Palestine. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 3 

7. Mr. LAWRENCE (United States of America) regretted that the issue of the 
Israeli delegate's credentials had been raised once again in a plenary meeting of the General 
Conference. As reflected in paragraph 6 of the General Committee's report, his delegation 
believed that the grounds for the reservations expressed by Arab delegations in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/32 were not pertinent to the work of the General Conference. The Israeli 
delegate's credentials were in full compliance with the requirements of the Rules of 
Procedure and should be accepted. His delegation therefore considered that there was no 
further need for the Conference to consider the issue. 
8. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference was prepared to adopt 
the draft resolution contained in paragraph 10 of document GC(XXXVIII)/41. 
9. The draft resolution was adopted. 
RESTORATION OF TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO ISRAEL (GC(XXXVIII)/14, 
GC(XXXVIII)/34) 

10. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda at the 
request of Israel, which had submitted the explanatory memorandum contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/14. Also before the Conference was a draft resolution submitted by Israel in 
document GC(XXXVIII)/34. 
11. However, extensive consultations held by him had revealed a clear preference on the 
part of many delegations for the matter to be resolved by means of a Presidential Statement. 
He therefore wished to read the following statement for endorsement by the Conference: 
"Over the past few days, I have held extensive consultations with many delegations. 
They have revealed a clear preference for a conclusion of this item through an agreed 
Presidential Statement. 

"I have, however, also been made aware of much impatience that arrangements have 

not yet been achieved to ensure that the Middle East is free of nuclear weapons, and 

I have found unanimous support for a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that region. 

"It is recognized that, in principle, technical assistance should be available for the 
benefit of all Member States, in accordance with the Agency's Statute. A number of 
delegations feel strongly that it would be wrong to try and settle the issue of technical 
co-operation with Israel at this time. Others feel equally strongly that restoring it is 
warranted at this time. My dominant impression is that the delegates to this 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 4 

Conference wish to do what they can to accelerate the peace process in the Middle 
East and to contribute to the goal of nuclear non-proliferation in the region. 

"It is therefore my understanding that the Conference is now ready to restore 
technical assistance to Israel and looks forward to closer co-operation between the 
Agency and Israel in Agency activities in accordance with the Agency's Statute and 
objectives." 

12. The Conference endorsed the Presidential Statement. 
13. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), thanking the President for 
inviting him to speak, said that he had requested the floor before the Conference's 
endorsement of the Presidential Statement but clearly the President had not noticed his signal 
immediately owing to an obstruction in the hall. 
14. As was well known, his country did not recognize the occupation of Palestinian land 
by Israel, which had seized it by force and was holding on to it with external support. 
Neither the act of occupation nor the existence of continuous Superpower support over a 
number of decades established the legitimacy of the occupying regime as a new State. His 
country's position was essentially a humanitarian one, which had been misinterpreted in the 
information media and in certain other quarters. 
15. The reasons for depriving Israel of the right to receive technical assistance from the 
Agency were still valid, and the call for the restoration of that right was therefore 
unacceptable. 
16. For at least two decades Israel had received technical assistance in the form of nuclear 
technology, but that assistance had not been for peaceful purposes. The world had therefore 
been worrying about the threat to peace posed by the nuclear weaponry of a hostile regime 
in a peace-seeking region - the Middle East. 
17. It was a matter for regret that at least some nuclear-weapon States had been involved 
in the transfer to Israel of nuclear material, equipment and technology for non-peaceful 
applications in violation of the NPT, to the great disappointment of non-nuclear-weapon 
States parties to the NPT, and particularly the countries of the Non-Aligned Movement. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 5 

18. Turning to the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIII)/34, he said that, even if 
Israel had been making a "continuous contribution to the technical assistance programme of 
the Agency", that by no means offset Israel's lack of commitment to peace and its disrespect 
for the NPT and for safeguards in the Middle East. 
19. As to the ongoing Middle East peace negotiations, the recent political developments 
were controversial and there was still no concrete evidence of a peaceful settlement of the 
Palestinian issue within the Palestinian community in the occupied territories; and there was 
certainly no hope that Palestine's refugees would be able to return to their homeland as 
desired by over a billion Muslims throughout the world. 
20. Accordingly, and given the fact that the Agency's technical co-operation programme 
was short of funds even at its present level, his delegation could not accept the draft 
resolution. 
21. The PRESIDENT said that, as no objections had been raised after his reading 
out the Presidential Statement, the Conference had endorsed it. Therefore, the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/34 had been superseded and was not open 
for discussion. 
22. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said that the substantial progress made towards the 
achievement of peace in the Middle East should be complemented by efforts, on the part of 
the entire region, directed towards the application of safeguards to all nuclear installations 
in that region. 
23. However, there could be no real peace as long as Israel maintained its superiority as 
regards weapons of mass destruction, which represented a constant threat to all the peoples 
of the Middle East. 
24. Agreement on a nuclear-weapon-free zone (NWFZ) in the Middle East was a 
prerequisite for building confidence and eventually achieving a comprehensive, just and 
lasting peace. 
25. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) said his delegation greatly regretted 
the fact that the Conference had decided on the restoration of technical assistance to Israel. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 6 

Following its attack on Iraq's nuclear research reactor, Israel had disregarded successive 
General Conference resolutions calling for the establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East. 
The Conference's action was tantamount to encouraging Israel to become even more stubborn 
in its refusal to accept the international community's wishes. 

26. Moreover, the notion that the restoration of technical assistance to Israel would 
somehow facilitate the ongoing Middle East peace negotiations was illusory. They would be 
facilitated only by the return of the occupied lands to their rightful owners. Israel had in 
effect been handed something for nothing by the Conference. 
27. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon) said it was too early to consider restoring technical 
assistance to Israel. The Conference had acted as if a comprehensive peace had already been 
achieved in the Middle East, whereas in reality the peace process had barely begun. 
Lebanon - like the Syrian Arab Republic - still faced a long and difficult journey along the 
road to peace. 
28. The restoration of technical assistance to Israel might have been acceptable to 
Lebanon had Israel implemented United Nations resolutions calling on it to end its occupation 
of part of Lebanon and release Lebanese hostages from its prisons. As long as Israel 
continued to flout United Nations resolutions and behaved as a despotic occupying power, 
the restoration of technical assistance was completely unacceptable to his country. 
29. Furthermore, Israel, although an Agency Member State, was hampering the 
establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East - further proof that the restoration of technical 
assistance was not justified. Israel's unwillingness to accede to the NPT, in contrast to the 
action taken by most other countries of the region, meant that his delegation could not but 
express its reservations concerning the Presidential Statement just read out. 
30. Mr. OWN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said his delegation also had reservations 
concerning the Presidential Statement and could not accept the restoration of technical 
assistance to Israel. 
31. For over 20 years, by ignoring calls that it accede to the NPT and submit all its 
nuclear facilities to safeguards, Israel had hampered the establishment of an NWFZ in the 
Middle East. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 7 

32. As the suspension of the provision of Agency technical assistance to Israel had come 
about as a direct result of Israel's attack on Iraq, the restoration of such assistance when 
nothing had changed in the intervening period could only be regarded as encouragement to 
an aggressor. It was hardly conducive to the establishment of a just peace in the Middle 
East. 
33. The international community, and particularly the major Powers, should make every 
effort to ensure that right prevailed. Israel had done nothing to justify a restoration of 
Agency technical assistance, and to his delegation it seemed as if the accepted standards for 
dealing with such a situation no longer applied. 
34. Mr. AL ZUBI (Jordan) said that, listening to the Presidential Statement, one 
might almost have believed that Israel had heeded all the resolutions adopted in connection 
with its past actions. His delegation, however, would like to ask a few questions. 
35. First, had Israel really committed itself to the solely peaceful utilization of nuclear 
technology? Second, had Israel declared its entire nuclear programme? Third, had Israel 
committed itself to accepting Agency safeguards on its entire nuclear programme? Fourth, 
had Israel at any time announced that it was acceding to the NPT? Fifth, had Israel ever 
undertaken - as a pre-condition for the restoration of technical assistance - not to destroy 
other countries' nuclear facilities? 
36. Those and many other questions remained unanswered, and his delegation failed to 
understand how Member States of the Agency could accept the restoration of technical 
assistance to Israel. 
37. Mr. FRANK (Israel) said his delegation greatly appreciated the fact that the 
Conference had endorsed the Presidential Statement, thereby reassuring Israel that it could 
expect fair and just treatment from the Agency's policy-making organs. 
38. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that, given the statements 
just made by certain Islamic delegations, the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVEI)/34 could not be regarded as adopted. He therefore proposed that the 
Conference take a roll-call vote on the matter. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 8 

39. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said that in his opinion there was no need 
for a roll-call vote. 
40. The PRESIDENT said that, as he had indicated earlier, his consultations had 
revealed a clear preference for the conclusion of the deliberations under the present agenda 
item through a Presidential Statement. Since no objections had been raised after he had read 
out the Presidential Statement, the Conference had endorsed the Statement and there was no 
reason to discuss the draft resolution. 
41. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said, as he had indicated 
earlier, he had requested the floor before the Conference's endorsement of the Presidential 
Statement. The President had perhaps been rather hasty in assuming the Conference's 
endorsement. 
42. Were the results of behind-the-scenes consultations being imposed on the Conference? 
At all events, his delegation objected to the Presidential Statement and would like a roll-call 
vote on it. 
43. The PRESIDENT ruled that the Conference had already taken its decision 
under agenda item 31 and that the matter was now closed. Delegates were, however, free 
to appeal against his ruling. 
APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(XXXVIII)/18; 
GC(XXXVIII)/33, GC(XXXVIII)/33/Mod.l, GC(XXXVIII)/33/Corr.lGC(
XXXVIII/33/Mod. 1/Corr.1, GC(XXXVIII)/33/Rev. 1) 

44. The PRESIDENT, noting that the item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/627 adopted by the General Conference in 1993, 
said that the Director General had submitted the report contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/18 pursuant to operative paragraph 9 of that resolution. 
45. The draft resolution submitted in document GC(XXXVIII)/33 had been amended as 
indicated in document GC(XXXVIII)/33/Mod.l. The sponsors were the Member States 
listed in the Corrigendum to those two documents. 
46. He invited a representative of one of the sponsors to explain further modifications 
which the sponsors wished to make. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 9 

47. Mr. KAREM (Egypt), explaining the further modifications1, said they were 
the result of intensive consultations which had taken place during the past few hours. 
48. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), expressing bis country's 
support for the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIQ)/33 and for the 
amendments thereto, said that the Islamic Republic of Iran continued to hope for the 
establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East. 
49. The Agency's efforts directed towards that objective and the positive response from 
some States in the region were to be commended. However, he was afraid that Israel's 
nuclear weapons capability and the stubbornness which Israel had displayed with regard to 
the application of Agency safeguards would - unless an end were put to them - destroy all 
chances of a long-lasting peace in the region. 
50. Mr. OWN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) asked for the name of his country to be 
removed from the list of sponsors of the draft resolution. Despite the weaknesses of the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/33, his delegation had agreed to be a 
sponsor in the interest of consensus. It could not agree, however, to the insertion of an 
operative paragraph containing a reference to the ongoing peace negotiations. 
51. Mr. EINHORN (United States of America) said that many of the amendments 
introduced by the sponsors of the draft resolution reflected language adopted by consensus 
in 1993, which should facilitate a decision on the draft resolution. As delegations might need 
time to reflect upon the latest amendments, he moved that the meeting be suspended. 
52. The PRESIDENT said that a consolidated version of the draft resolution - with 
all amendments - would be prepared and distributed as soon as possible. 
The meeting was suspended at 5.35 p.m. and resumed at 6.30 p.m. 

53. Mr. EINHORN (United States of America) - referring to the consolidated text 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/33/Rev.l, which had just been distributed - proposed 
that in operative paragraph 3 "particularly" be replaced by "including". 
See the consolidated draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/33/Rev. 1. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 10 

54. Mr. OMAR (Sudan) said that his country had agreed to be a sponsor of the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/33 in order to promote a consensus. 
However, consultations among the countries concerned had subsequently resulted in 
amendments which included the insertion of a paragraph highlighting the ongoing Middle 
East peace negotiations. Although those negotiations were running up against constant 
obstacles on account of Israel's position, particularly with regard to Jerusalem and the 
occupied territories in Syria and South Lebanon, his delegation had been prepared to support 
the modified draft resolution. Now another country wanted to introduce a further 
amendment, which had not been discussed in consultations with all the countries concerned, 
and he would therefore like Sudan to be deleted from the list of sponsors. 
55. Mr. KAREM (Egypt) said that, as a sponsor of the draft resolution, his 
country would have preferred to keep the word "particularly" in operative paragraph 3. In 
the interest of consensus, however, his delegation - on behalf of all the delegations 
sponsoring the draft resolution - accepted the proposed amendment and hoped that the draft 
resolution would be adopted without a vote. 
56. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference wished to adopt - without a 
vote - the draft resolution contained in document GC (XXXVIII)/33/Rev. 1 with the word 
"particularly" in operative paragraph 3 replaced by "including". 
57. The Conference adopted the draft resolution as amended. 
58. Mr. FRANK (Israel), noting that his country had once again joined the 
consensus on a resolution regarding "Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East", 
said that the resolution contained some language which was not compatible with Israel's 
policy. It had joined the consensus, however, because it supported the goal of establishing 
an NWFZ in the Middle East. 
59. In order to avoid any misunderstandings, he would like to reiterate his Government's 
policy on the nuclear issue, which was based on four principles. The first principle was 
comprehensiveness: the nuclear issue should be dealt with in the full context of the peace 
process and of all the regional security problems - conventional and non-conventional. The 
second principle concerned the regional framework: nuclear non-proliferation would be 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 11 

achieved and sustained only through the establishment of a mutually verifiable NWFZ in the 
Middle East. The third principle was a step-by-step approach: practicality dictated 
beginning the process with confidence- and security-building measures, establishing peace 
relations and - in due course - complementing the process by dealing with conventional and 
non-conventional arms control, priority being given to systems that experience had proven 
to be destructive and destabilizing. The fourth principle was the primacy of the peace 
process: the negotiations on all issues concerning the security of the region must be 
conducted in a free and direct manner, as they were in fact being conducted in the bilateral 
and multilateral talks within the framework of the peace process. 

60. He called on all Member States to respect the inviolability of the peace negotiations, 
in which all issues pertaining to peace - in all its aspects - would eventually be taken up. 
Those negotiations were beginning to yield manifest results. In return for being allowed to 
live in peace, it was Israel that was being expected to make contributions of substance within 
those negotiations. 
61. In conclusion, he expressed the hope that the future of the Middle East would be one 
of peace and reconciliation. 
62. Mr. BAKSHI (India) said that India was a long-standing supporter of all efforts 
aimed at achieving a comprehensive and lasting peace in the Middle East and that his 
delegation welcomed the progress made towards that goal, especially the historic agreement 
between Israel and the PLO. 
63. Referring to the resolution just adopted, he noted that it talked - inter alia - about the 
establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East. His delegation believed that, under the 
Statute, the Agency could apply safeguards pursuant to an NWFZ agreement only at the 
request of States party to that agreement. Proposals for the establishment of an NWFZ 
should emanate from the region concerned, should have the support of all the States in the 
region and should be the result of negotiations among them. 
64. Similar resolutions adopted in the past by consensus had not called on the States in 
the region to accede to the NPT, regarding which India's position was well known: the NPT 
was discriminatory and not universal and could not lead to the goal of global nuclear 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 

page 12 

disarmament. Furthermore, it was for each sovereign State to decide whether to accede to 
theNPT. 

65. Although his delegation had reservations about some elements of the resolution, as 
no States of the region had expressed any reservations it had decided to join the consensus 
in favour of adoption. 
REPORT ON VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS PLEDGED TO THE TECHNICAL 
ASSISTANCE AND CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1995 (GC(XXXVIII)/24/Rev.4) 

66. The PRESIDENT, drawing attention to document GC(XXXVIII)/24/Rev.4, 
said that by 5.30 p.m. on 22 September 1994 the contributions pledged by 41 Member States 
to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1995 had reached a total of 
US $11 956 870. Since then, Albania had pledged $6150, bringing the total amount pledged 
for 1995 to $11 963 020. 
67. He noted with regret that, at a time when there were calls to strengthen the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities, the level of pledges at the end of a General Conference 
session was the lowest for five years. He hoped that delegations which had not yet made 
pledges for 1995 would do so at the earliest opportunity, so that the 1995-96 programme to 
be proposed to the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee might be based on 
reasonably assured resources. 
CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

68. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) congratulated the President on the 
wisdom and patience with which he had guided the Conference's work. Also, he thanked 
delegates, the Director General and the Secretariat for helping to make the General 
Conference's thirty-eighth regular session a success. 
69. Mr. REGEUR (Netherlands), speaking on behalf of the Western Europe 
Group, thanked the President for the excellent way in which he had guided the Conference 
through its business. 
70. Mr. ROUX (South Africa), speaking on behalf of the African Group, 
congratulated the President on the highly professional manner in which he had presided over 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 13 

the General Conference. Also, he thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for their 
efforts. 

71. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines), associating himself with the comments of the 
previous speakers, said that the dexterity with which the President had handled moves 
intended to blur certain issues before the Conference had earned him the respect and 
admiration of the Philippine delegation. 
72. Ms. SCHICK (Australia), speaking on behalf of the South East Asia and the 
Pacific Group, thanked the President for his extremely capable handling of the session. 
73. The PRESIDENT, having expressed his thanks for the kind words addressed 
to him, said it had been an honour and a privilege to serve as President of the General 
Conference at its thirty-eighth regular session. He was grateful to all delegates for their cooperation 
and to the Director General and the staff of the Secretariat for their efforts during 
and before the Conference session. He was especially grateful to Mr. Sanmuganathan, the 
Secretary of the Conference, without whose expertise and efficiency his task would have been 
an impossible one. 
74. On behalf of the Conference, he thanked the Austrian authorities and the City of 
Vienna for the traditional hospitality which had been enjoyed by all during the week. 
75. He had been struck by the spirit of good will that had prevailed during the session. 
When it had appeared that positions could not be reconciled, everyone had endeavoured to 
find compromise solutions in order to advance the decision-making process. Solutions had 
been found to most problems, and there was no reason to be ashamed of the Conference's 
1994 track record. 
76. He would make no apologies for saying that the world was in a state of constant flux. 
The general debate had been opened by the South African Minister for Foreign Affairs, 
Mr. Nzo, and during a luncheon in the course of the week a Russian and an American 
Minister had engaged in a relaxed discussion regarding the construction of a nuclear fuel 
reprocessing plant. Such things would have been unthinkable a few years before. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.10 
page 14 

77. For decades, people had been living in a two-dimensional world, where everything 
was labelled "East" or "West", "black" or "white" - "safeguards" or "technical assistance". 
The General Conference, however, had proved - if proof was needed - that the world had 
more than two dimensions to offer. Admittedly, that meant a more complicated world, with 
difficult compromises which not long before would have been inconceivable. The 
Conference had reached such compromises, and he believed that the effort had been 
worthwhile. 
78. Before closing the session, in accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure he 
invited the delegations to observe a minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

79. The PRESIDENT declared the thirty-eighth regular session of the General 
Conference closed. 
The meeting rose at 7.10 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
7 October 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE FIRST PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 19 September 1994, at 10.10 a.m. 
Temporary President: Mr. BLIX (Director General) 
President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraohs 
Opening of the session 1 •-3 
1 Election of officers and appointment of the General Committee 4 1• 
3 
2 Message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations 14 -24 
3 Statement by the Director General 25-
68 
4 Statement by the Director General of the Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 69-81 
6 Voluntary contributions to the Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation Fund for 1995 82-84 
7 General debate and annual report for 1993 85-117 
Statements by the delegates of the following States: 
South Africa 
Japan 
China 
85 -
94-
10593 
104 
117 
1 Election of officers and appointment of the General 
Committee (resumed) 118-119 

GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/11/Rev.2. 
94-03779 (VIII) 


GC(xxxvIII)/OR.1 
page 2 

AFRA 

Assistance 
Convention 

Biological 
Weapons 
Convention 

Chemical Weapons 
Convention 

CIS 
DPRK 
FAO 
G-7 
G-24 
GATT 
Notification 
Convention 
NPT 
OAU 
RADWASS 
Rarotonga Treaty 
RBMK 
RCA 

TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 
UNEP 
UNESCO 
WANO 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and 
Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on 
Their Destruction 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Group of Seven 
Group of Twenty-Four 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 

Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Organization of African Unity 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Environment Programme 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 3 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared the thirty-eighth regular session of 
the General Conference open. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited the delegates to 
observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT welcomed all the participants. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 
4. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of 
President of the Conference. 
5. Mr. van EBBENHORST TENGBERGEN (Netherlands), speaking on behalf 
of the Western European group, proposed Mr. Baer (Switzerland), who was currently 
Deputy Director for Energy in the Swiss Ministry for Energy and Transport, as President of 
the thirty-eighth regular session of the General Conference. 
6. Mr. Baer (Switzerland) was elected President by acclamation. 
7. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, on his own behalf and on behalf of all the 
delegates, congratulated Mr. Baer on his election and wished him every success. 
Mr. Baer (Switzerland) took the Chair. 

8. The PRESIDENT said that he appreciated the honour bestowed upon himself 
and his country by his election as President of the thirty-eighth session of the General 
Conference. 
9. Since the summer of 1945, nuclear energy had not been used in military operations. 
For decades, work in the interests of nuclear non-proliferation had been conducted" within the 
framework of the Agency, the NPT and other forums. The Rarotonga Treaty, the recent 
developments relating to the Tlatelolco Treaty and the current efforts to achieve a nuclearweapon-
free Africa had been the most important stages in that process. 
10. Even if some people wished to put the clock back while others dreamed of a world 
without nuclear energy, it was impossible to deny that the applications of nuclear energy had 
transformed the world irreversibly and enriched the very structure of society. The cobalt 
bomb, the medical applications of radioisotopes, the campaigns for the sterilization of 
parasites, the preservation of foodstuffs by irradiation and the generation of electricity 
without carbon dioxide emissions were all evidence of that tremendous progress. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 4 

11. The planet Earth, a fragile globe that had become cracked as a result of the ravages 
of time, was in urgent need of repair. The Agency's Member States, which had decided, 
under Article n of the Agency's Statute, that the Agency should seek to accelerate and 
enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the 
world, were responsible for making the best possible use of nuclear energy as a means of 
repairing that globe and maintaining, embellishing and enriching it. 
12. Turning to the appointment of the General Committee, he recalled that, under 
Rules 34 and 40 of the Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to elect eight Vicepresidents, 
the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, and five additional members of the 
General Committee. As the African group had not yet reached agreement on its candidates 
to serve on the General Committee, he suggested proceeding with the election of the 
candidates whose names were already known and deferring the election of the other members 
of the Committee until the regional group in question had completed its consultations. He 
therefore proposed that, under Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the delegates of Austria, 
Cuba, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Malaysia, the Russian Federation, the United States of 
America and Viet Nam be elected as Vice-Presidents, and Mr. Hermann Goesele of Germany 
as Chairman of the Committee of the Whole; and that, under Rule 40, the delegates of 
Canada, the Czech Republic, Mexico and Qatar be elected as additional members of the 
General Committee. 
13. The President's proposals were accepted. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

The PRESIDENT said that, as the General Committee had not yet been 
fully constituted, it would be some time before the Conference was able to adopt its 
agenda for the current session. He therefore proposed that the General Conference, 
pursuant to Rule 102 of the Rules of Procedure, waive Rule 42 until the General 
Committee had met and had submitted its report on the agenda, so that the General 
Conference could consider items 3, 4, 5 and 7 of the provisional agenda contained 
in document GC(XXXVIII)/1 and start the general debate, and the Committee of the 
Whole could start meeting to consider provisional agenda items 10 to 22. That 
procedure, which had been adopted on several previous occasions, was, so far as he 
could judge, the only way in which the General Conference could complete its work 
within the traditional time limit of five working days. 

The President's proposal was accepted. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 5 

14. Mr. GIACOMELLI (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) said that, despite the many positive opportunities for progress which the end of the 
Cold War continued to present, the world was still a dangerous place. The task of forging 
a new framework for global peace, security and development had been fraught with 
difficulties and uncertainties. In the context of those challenges and changes, the Agency's 
work had assumed a higher profile than at any other time in its history. 

15. Ensuring the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was vital. Assisted by the Agency, 
Governments needed urgently to devise and implement truly effective methods to ensure that 
illicit nuclear material did not become available to the highest bidder on the international 
black market. He commended the efforts of those Governments which were already working 
together to address that concern and urged the international community to take all measures 
necessary to deal with that threat. 
16. The NPT remained the cornerstone of international efforts to prevent the spread of 
nuclear weapons and it was essential to maintain its integrity. The Agency and the Member 
States of the United Nations as a whole had to play their respective roles in ensuring full 
compliance with its provisions. The effective co-operation that existed in that regard between 
the United Nations and the Agency was essential. 
17. There had been several developments in recent months. The DPRK had taken some 
positive steps towards resuming its obligations under the NPT. Kyrgyzstan and Kazakhstan 
had acceded to the Treaty, bringing the number of signatories to 164. The Government of 
Ukraine had agreed to place its nuclear material under Agency safeguards and had indicated 
its intention to accede to the NPT. 
18. He welcomed those important moves but, although the Agency and the international 
community had clearly demonstrated their commitment to maintaining the integrity of the 
NPT, there was no room for complacency and much still needed to be done. He therefore 
welcomed the steps which were being taken by the Agency to strengthen the safeguards 
system and expressed his full support for the efforts which were being undertaken to submit 
proposals for an improved safeguards system to the forthcoming NPT Extension Conference, 
at which he hoped Member States would agree to extend the Treaty indefinitely and 
unconditionally. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 6 

19. It was regrettable that there still had not been sufficient progress towards the 
conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. Agreement on such a treaty should be a 
prime objective of international efforts to stem the proliferation of nuclear weapons. A test 
ban agreement would demonstrate the commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to a future 
free of nuclear weapons and would provide a significant boost to non-proliferation efforts 
worldwide. 
20. In the preceding year, the General Assembly had adopted by consensus a resolution 
recommending that negotiations begin on an international treaty banning the production of 
fissile materials for nuclear weapons. That was an encouraging first step. The Agency, with 
its extensive experience in safeguards verification activities, was well placed to play a key 
role in both the development and implementation of such a treaty. 
21. Clearly, the Agency and the United Nations should continue to play a leading role in 
those vital areas, but the Agency had important responsibilities in other areas too - in 
particular in the field of nuclear power and safety. The recent adoption of a Convention on 
Nuclear Safety by 84 countries had been an important step forward in the field of nuclear 
safety. That Convention would serve as a basic international framework for safety and 
review procedures related to nuclear power plants. Among other things, it would help ensure 
the safety of older generations of plants, an issue which had been causing increasing concern 
in recent years. The Convention would be opened for signature at the General Conference 
and he urged all Member States to sign it so that it could enter into force as soon as possible. 
22. The continuing activities of the international community aimed at mitigating the 
effects of the Chernobyl accident were a constant reminder of the priority that had to be 
given to ensuring nuclear safety. The United Nations had acted as a catalyst for multilateral 
and bilateral efforts to address the consequences of the Chernobyl disaster. The work of the 
Committee for Co-ordination on Chernobyl was a prime example of the many different types 
of relief operations which were currently being mounted under the auspices of the United 
Nations. Although the Chernobyl plant was still operating and was likely to continue to do 
so for the immediate future, the Agency had played an active role in monitoring the 
operations there to ensure that they were being conducted in accordance with recognized 
international safety standards. The high level of co-operation between the United Nations 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 7 

and the Agency on those issues would continue. Co-operation would also continue between 
the Agency and the UNDP on their joint project aimed at improving the radiation safety 
infrastructure in the countries of the Commonwealth of Independent States. 

23. In the context of its many global responsibilities, the Agency's role in implementing 
the recommendations of Agenda 21, the central document of the 1992 United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development, should not be forgotten. In addition to 
serving as the lead United Nations agency with regard to the management of radioactive 
waste, the Agency had also assisted UNEP with the compilation of comprehensive data on 
a range of environmental issues. He looked forward to additional co-operative efforts 
between the Agency and other parts of the United Nations family in implementing the 
important recommendations of Agenda 21. 
24. The Agency's work encompassed a broad range of areas and issues, many of which 
were of crucial importance to Member States and to the international community as a whole. 
He trusted that the close co-operation that had characterized the relationship between the 
Agency and the United Nations would continue. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

25. The DIRECTOR GENERAL noted that two anniversaries of particular 
importance to the Agency would be occurring during the coming year: it would be 50 years 
since the founding of the United Nations and 25 years since the entry into force of the NPT. 
Those anniversaries would provide a good opportunity for thinking about future directions. 
26. Frequently, the United Nations system was criticized as lacking in cohesion and 
co-ordination. That criticism was not valid for the Agency's relations with the United 
Nations and United Nations organizations. The General Conference and the Board of 
Governors consistently followed the lead of the United Nations in political matters. The 
Agency also sought to play its full part in any United Nations system-wide efforts, such as 
the current work to promote sustainable development by implementing Agenda 21. Above 
all, the cases of Iraq and the DPRK had demonstrated the close, prompt and effective liaison 
and interaction which existed between the Agency and the United Nations. The Security 
Council viewed the Agency as the nuclear inspection arm of the United Nations system and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 8 

the Agency looked to the Council as the body politically responsible for the implementation 
of nuclear arms control measures. As attention to nuclear non-proliferation issues increased 
and more nuclear arms control measures requiring verification were adopted, it would be 
reasonable and cost-effective to continue building on that distribution of functions in order 
to avoid duplication. 

27. He asked the Secretary-General's representative, Mr. Giacomelli, to convey to the 
Secretary-General his appreciation for the excellent and close liaison which was maintained 
between the Agency and the United Nations and, in particular, the Security Council. A 
secure phone and fax line had recently been established between the Secretary-General's 
office and his own office. However, he hoped it would not need to be used very often. 
28. The Agency's co-operation with other organizations in the United Nations system was 
extensive. As the current year marked the thirtieth anniversary of the establishment of the 
Division which the Agency operated jointly with the FAO, it was appropriate to mention that 
Division's very successful activities testifying to the increasing relevance of nuclear 
techniques for food production and preservation. There was also reason to draw attention 
to the 30 years of close co-operation with UNESCO in the joint administration of the 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics at Trieste. The operational responsibility for the 
Centre, hitherto borne by the Agency, was soon to be transferred to UNESCO. Since its 
creation in 1964, the Centre had grown rapidly. He greatly appreciated the work of 
Professor Abdus Salam, who had been the Centre's dynamic leader, and thanked the Italian 
Government for its great generosity in supporting the Centre. He was confident that it would 
continue to be an important meeting place for physicists from industrially advanced and 
developing countries. 
29. In 1995, it would be 25 years since the NPT had entered into force. The more than 
160 parties to the Treaty would be reviewing past experience of the Treaty, considering its 
future and deciding on its extension. The cases of Iraq and the DPRK had raised questions 
about the reliability of commitments made under the Treaty and had highlighted the need to 
strengthen verification activities. At the same time, the Treaty continued to attract new 
parties. The Agency was producing substantial background material for the NPT Extension 
Conference, in particular on safeguards implementation and the transfer of nuclear science 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 9 

and technology for peaceful purposes. It looked forward to receiving guidance from the 
Conference on those tasks. 

30. It had become customary to view the Agency's functions as being dual: promoting 
the use of nuclear energy on the one hand and providing verification of its peaceful use on 
the other. However, a simple distinction between promotional and regulatory functions did 
not do justice to the full range of functions and activities envisaged by the Statute. Where, 
for instance, did the Agency's normative work in the field of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection fit into such a scheme? The Statute entrusted the Agency with a number of broad 
functions and activities and Member States had an interest in the effective pursuit of all those 
functions and activities. He took it that the right response to the concern expressed in 
resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/618, entitled "Strengthening of the Agency's Main Activities", 
consisted not only in the transfer of more nuclear technology and in updating and 
strengthening the Agency's safeguards system, but also in the development of international 
rules and services in the field of nuclear safety, and even the performance of verification 
tasks requested by the Security Council or under bilateral or multilateral agreements in the 
field of nuclear arms control and disarmament. All those activities were clearly within the 
Agency's mandate and none of them should be neglected. The real obstacle to any 
strengthening of the various parts of the Agency's mandate and activities did not lie in any 
statutory restraints, but rather in the zero-real-growth strait-jacket and in the non-payment 
and late payment of contributions. 
31. Turning to Agency activities relating to nuclear power, he said that the conference 
which had been held two weeks previously on the nuclear power option had shown that it 
was relatively easy to describe the current status of nuclear power, but hard to predict its 
future role. Even with ambitious conservation efforts, the world would greatly increase its 
use of electricity in the coming decades. As the viable sources of large-scale electricity 
generation would be limited, for at least the next few decades, to the burning of fossil fuels, 
hydroelectric power and nuclear power, it ought to be in the interest of Governments to 
stimulate a discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of those different options. The 
Agency had a long tradition of comparing the viability of nuclear power and other electricity 
sources in different countries. Together with a number of other organizations, it was 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 10 

pursuing the so-called DECADES project, the aim of which was to respond to the growing 
interest in the comparative assessment of different electricity generation options in terms of 
their environmental impact, reliability and economy. Such assessments were of interest, not 
least in connection with the search for scenarios to counter the emission of greenhouse gases, 
notably carbon dioxide, in order to reduce the risk of global warming. It was striking, but 
not surprising, that the scenarios which achieved the most effective reduction in CO2 
emissions had a strong nuclear power component. The Agency's continued participation in 
the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change had enabled it to highlight the 
fact that realistic, sustainable electricity supply strategies would require a balanced mix of 
energy sources in the world, including a significant volume of nuclear power. 

32. One area in which the Agency had drastically expanded its activities to respond to 
new needs was nuclear safety. The Chernobyl disaster had triggered the prompt elaboration 
of the Notification and Assistance Conventions. Those Conventions had become part of the 
international nuclear power legal infrastructure and periodic exercises were run to test their 
readiness. While an updated convention on liability was still sorely needed, a convention on 
the safety of nuclear power had been adopted in June 1994 and there was a consensus that 
a convention on the safe management and disposal of nuclear waste should be drafted. Such 
legal instruments, building on the still developing array of detailed but non-binding standards 
and guides, responded to new expectations in the international community. While national 
authorities retained full responsibility for and control of the safety of nuclear operations and 
waste handling, they wished to have an insight into how that responsibility was exercised in 
other countries and also to have the possibility to urge compliance with common standards. 
33. The Agency's assessment activities relating to the safety of nuclear power plants in 
Eastern Europe and countries of the former Soviet Union had continued. Significant progress 
had been made with the establishment of a consensus on priorities for safety improvements 
in the different generations of WWER and RBMK reactors. That consensus provided 
guidance both for national programmes to improve safety and international assistance efforts 
co-ordinated by the G-24 mechanism. It also offered information which was of relevance to 
the practical and useful work that was being performed by the WANO. Experts visiting 
plants had reported that safety was improving, though not at the same pace in all plants and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 11 

in all countries. It was clear that significant efforts would still be necessary for years to 
come and that the main responsibility for updating or phasing out reactors would be carried 
by the countries concerned. 

34. The agreement on the International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against 
Ionizing Radiation and the Safety of Radiation Sources, which had been sponsored by six 
international organizations, including the Agency, was another important development in the 
area of radiation safety. Those Standards, which had been adopted by the Board of 
Governors the preceding week, contained important guidelines on responsibilities for the 
control and safety of radiation sources and the protection of workers, the general public and 
medical patients. In that connection, it should be remembered that medical uses of radiation 
were by far the greatest man-made contributor to general radiation exposure. 
35. In the field of management of spent nuclear fuel and the disposal of radioactive waste, 
States were making increasing use of the Agency as a channel for exchange of experience 
and as a mechanism for elaborating joint norms and securing services. Since long-lived 
nuclear waste would be a global heritage it was reasonable that international consensus should 
be sought on ways of dealing with it. International normative work on radioactive waste 
continued to progress under the Agency's RADWASS programme. In December, the Board 
of Governors was expected to approve two documents - the Safety Fundamentals document 
entitled "Principles of Radioactive Waste Management" and a Safety Standards document on 
planning. Those documents should provide the basis for work on a convention on waste 
management. 
36. Although the concept of regional solutions for the safe storage and disposal of 
radioactive waste was a rational one, it was not easy to realize. Of course, countries that 
embarked on nuclear energy programmes had to be ready to manage and dispose safely of 
the radioactive waste that resulted from those programmes. However, since some nuclear 
waste would remain radioactive for thousands of years, a more responsible approach vis-a-vis 
future generations might be to agree on fewer, well-selected and well-built waste repositories, 
rather than obliging each country to use some piece of its own territory for disposal 
purposes. It might be possible to revive a rational discussion on that subject one day. 
However, even at the present time, in certain regions where technical and economic 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 12 

resources and the scope of nuclear activities were limited, regional solutions would offer a 
practical alternative to national storage and disposal of certain types of radioactive waste. 
For instance, the Secretariat had begun to assess the feasibility of applying a regional solution 
to the problem of spent radium sources in Africa. 

37. A particular aspect of radioactive waste disposal - sea dumping - had attracted much 
attention in the past year. At the sixteenth meeting of the Contracting Parties to the 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other Matter, 
which had been held in London in November 1993, a decision had been taken to prohibit the 
dumping of all types of radioactive waste at sea. The Government of Russia had provided 
much information about past large-scale dumping of radioactive waste and equipment in the 
Kara Sea in the Arctic, and in the Eastern Seas, and about the Soviet nuclear submarine 
"Komsomolets", which had sunk in the Norwegian Sea and which contained two nuclear 
warheads and a nuclear reactor. In all three cases, the Agency's Marine Environment 
Laboratory in Monaco had been invited to participate in scientific missions. In the case of 
the submarine, the warheads had been successfully sealed to prevent leakages of plutonium 
into the ocean. The results of examinations undertaken so far in the three cases mentioned 
had revealed either no, or completely negligible, leakage of radioactivity. Nevertheless, 
environmental monitoring in those areas would have to continue. 
38. In most countries, the desire to acquire new nuclear techniques had led to the early 
establishment of special atomic energy commissions. The Agency had a long record of 
successful co-operation with such institutions. However, with the increased practical use 
being made of such technologies, there was a growing tendency for transfers to be handled 
through commercial channels or by specialized departments within institutions for agriculture, 
hydrology, medicine or industry. The Agency had to adapt and was adapting its role in the 
transfer of nuclear technology and nuclear applications to that new situation. 
39. There had also been significant changes in the orientation of the Agency's efforts to 
transfer nuclear science and technology, many of which were the result of system-wide 
recommendations within the United Nations family. One such recommendation was to make 
sure that the technical co-operation programme for each country was in line with national 
development priorities. Another recommendation was that emphasis should be placed on the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 13 

transfer of science and technology which could help increase food supplies and improve 
health. A third recommendation was to stress sustainable development and the protection of 
the environment in line with Agenda 21. A fourth emphasis was to ensure adequate radiation 
protection. All transfers of nuclear science and technology would be discredited unless they 
were matched by steps to ensure safety. 

40. One main focus of the Agency's technical assistance projects was the increase in the 
supply of food. The vaccination campaign in Africa against the virus-borne rinderpest had 
been a very successful example of such a project. Projects involving the sterile insect 
technique were also designed to increase food supply by protecting crops and livestock. 
There was a high level of interest in using that technique in countries of the Eastern 
Mediterranean, which might result in the whole Mediterranean area becoming a medfly-free 
zone. 
41. Food irradiation, which had been thoroughly tested and had been internationally 
approved by the Codex Alimentarius Commission, had considerable potential for preventing 
spoilage through insect and bacterial infestations as well as sprouting. The practical 
utilization of food irradiation had gained momentum both in advanced and developing 
countries. International trade in irradiated food was likely to increase further following the 
expected entry into force in 1995 of an agreement under the Uruguay round of GATT 
facilitating trade in food, including irradiated food, which had been processed according to 
international standards or recommendations. The media also seemed to have become 
increasingly objective in informing the public about the safety and benefits of food 
irradiation. 
42. A second main focus of the Agency's efforts to transfer nuclear techniques was the 
improvement of human health. Just one example of those efforts was the development and 
transfer of nuclear technologies for monitoring applied nutritional intervention programmes. 
43. A significant number of the Agency's technical programmes and technical 
co-operation projects were of relevance to environmental protection, sustainable development 
and the implementation of Agenda 21. For instance, a very large model project involving 
an industrial demonstration plant for electron beam purification of flue gases, with a cost 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 14 

estimate of over US $18 million was being implemented in Poland. In that project, electron 
beams from an accelerator were used to help transform flue gases from coal-burning plants 
containing sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides into fertilizer. The technology had been 
applied successfully on a pilot scale. The major part of the cost of the project was being 
covered by Poland, but it was hoped that significant voluntary contributions would cover the 
rest of that important project. 

44. The task of transferring nuclear techniques and technology posed major challenges to 
the Agency and to the recipient States, whose commitment and co-operation were required. 
It also posed challenges to donor States, as contributors to the TACF and to other funding 
mechanisms. Although the agreed target for the TACF had been steadily increasing and 
stood at $58.5 million for 1994, pledges for the current year had amounted to only 66.6% 
of the target as of 1 September and, of those pledges, only 33.2% had actually been paid. 
He earnestly appealed to Member States to pledge their share of the target for voluntary 
contributions and to pay their pledges so as not to jeopardize the Agency's programme. He 
also urged them to examine whether they could, in some cases, support projects in particular 
countries with resources from the bilateral aid programmes which they might already have 
with those countries. 
45. One of the Agency' s most important functions had been and remained the verification 
of the peaceful nature of nuclear activities through safeguards. The Agency's experience was 
unparalleled in the United Nations system and could be made use of in verifying future arms 
control and disarmament arrangements. 
46. The discovery by the Agency that Iraq, despite full-scope safeguards, had been able 
to develop secretly a substantial programme for uranium enrichment and weaponization had 
accelerated the efforts to strengthen the safeguards system and to reduce the risk that material 
or installations which should have been subjected to safeguards could remain undeclared and 
undetected. It had been realized that the Agency needed, above all, increased access to 
information and easier access to relevant sites and installations. Some proposals had already 
been endorsed by the Board of Governors, such as the early provision of design information 
and reporting on the export and import of nuclear material and specified equipment. Further 
proposals for a strengthened and more cost-effective safeguards system were being considered 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 15 

in Programme 93+2 and were to be presented to the Board of Governors in March 1995. 
The key proposals related to increased access to information about a State's nuclear 
programme and increased physical access to sites. The programme also included a study of 
a number of technical and administrative efficiency measures that could become part of a 
streamlined and fully rationalized safeguards system. Thanks to the co-operation of a large 
number of Member States, many new concepts were undergoing field tests and a clean 
laboratory facility was being established at Seibersdorf for the receipt and handling of 
safeguards samples. 

47. There was no doubt that the credibility of non-proliferation commitments would 
become increasingly important as the number of nuclear weapons in the world was reduced. 
Safeguards had a vital role to play in enhancing that credibility and should not be viewed by 
States as intrusions upon their sovereignty, but as opportunities to demonstrate compliance 
with important international obligations. That was how Governments generally viewed 
safeguards. Similarly, the increasing number of invitations which the Agency received to 
visit any place at any time were means by which States, in their enlightened self-interest, 
could increase their transparency and, at the very least, dispel specific unfounded allegations 
or suspicions which might have been expressed. He trusted that more such invitations would 
be issued, and that Governments would eliminate a number of restrictions which still reduced 
the effectiveness of safeguards and led to unnecessary costs. 
48. The report contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/19 summarized the safeguards 
implementation situation in the DPRK. Since the DPRK's declaration of its intention to 
withdraw from the NPT in 1993 and its subsequent suspension of that withdrawal, it 
appeared not to have recognized any legal obligation to accept safeguards inspections under 
its agreement with the Agency. Rather, it had followed, and continued to follow, an a la 
carte approach, in which the extent of the access granted for safeguards inspections varied 
according to developments in its negotiations with a third party. Both the Agency and the 
United Nations had concluded that the safeguards agreement remained valid and that the 
Agency was under an obligation to seek to implement it fully. That was what the Agency 
had consistently tried to do and was still trying to do. By the time of the June Board 
in 1994, the Agency, after a long interval, had been allowed to inspect all declared nuclear 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 16 

installations as required by the safeguards agreement. However, the DPRK's refusal to 
co-operate in providing access to additional sites and information, and the loss of data which 
had resulted from the method of fuel core discharge which the operator had chosen for the 
5 MW experimental reactor earlier in the year had prevented the assessment of the nuclear 
material inventory declared by the DPRK. It had also prevented a resolution of the 
inconsistency between that declaration and the Agency's findings. 

49. Although immediately following its withdrawal from membership of the Agency in 
June 1994, the DPRK had appeared to reject all safeguards inspections, that position had 
been modified somewhat following the meeting between the late President of the DPRK and 
the former United States President, Mr. Carter. The Agency had thus been able to maintain 
a continuous inspector presence at Nyongbyon since May 1994. During the summer, 
inspectors had been allowed to monitor some of the activities at the 5 MW plant in line with 
the request made to the Agency by the Security Council in late May. Maintenance of 
surveillance and seals at the reprocessing plant had also continued. However, the Agency's 
requests for access to the fuel fabrication plant, fresh fuel storage facilities and the new 
reprocessing line, which was under construction, had been denied during the summer. 
50. On 5 September, representatives of the DPRK had indicated to Agency inspectors on 
site that, following recent progress in the bilateral talks with the United States, the DPRK 
was ready to enlarge the scope of inspections. Inspections had recently been completed at 
the fuel fabrication plant and at the fresh fuel storage facility. Access to the reprocessing 
line had, however, not been granted. The results of the inspections which had taken place 
in March and May 1994 had not provided any indication of reprocessing of recently 
irradiated fuel or of loading of fresh fuel into the reactor. 
51. He hoped that all declared facilities would soon again be fully subjected to safeguards 
and that additional information and visits to additional sites would be forthcoming. 
52. Under the mandate of the Security Council the Agency had, to date, carried out 
26 inspection missions in Iraq and had completed the destruction, removal or rendering 
harmless of all known nuclear-weapons-usable material, facilities and equipment. In 
particular, the Agency had arranged for and supervised the removal from Iraq of all highly 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 17 

enriched uranium, the demolition of all facilities and the removal or destruction of nonnuclear 
material and equipment which could be used for the production of nuclear weapons. 
The Agency was satisfied that the scope of Iraq's former nuclear weapons programme was 
well understood and that Iraq no longer had any capability for the production of nuclear 
weapons. 

53. The implementation of the ongoing monitoring and verification plan did not affect the 
Agency's right to investigate any aspect of Iraq's former nuclear weapons capability and, in 
particular, its right to follow up on any new information which it felt warranted further 
investigation. 
54. In 1993, the General Conference had requested him to continue consultations with 
States of the Middle East region in order to facilitate the early application of full-scope 
Agency safeguards to all activities in the region. In pursuance of that mandate, and as 
reported in document GC(XXXVIII)/18, he had had further contacts with States in the region 
and the Agency had continued to participate in the Multilateral Working Group on Arms 
Control and Regional Security. He had received additional views on verification relevant to 
Middle East nuclear-weapon-free zones during his visits to Iran, Lebanon, the United Arab 
Emirates and Yemen. During the coming year, he intended to continue his consultations. 
As a follow-up to the seminar on the modalities for the application of safeguards in the 
Middle East, which had been organized in 1993, arrangements were currently being made 
to enable representatives of Middle East States to see a demonstration of verification 
techniques and to become acquainted with ways in which regional verification in Europe 
complemented the Agency's international verification efforts. 
55. Turning to Latin America, he noted that Argentina, Brazil and Chile had now ratified 
the Tlatelolco Treaty and the Quadripartite Safeguards Agreement between Argentina, Brazil, 
ABACC and the Agency had entered into force in March 1994. As Cuba had declared its 
intention to accede to the Tlatelolco Treaty in the near future, that Treaty was expected to 
enter into force, thus formalizing the status of the Latin American and Caribbean region as 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone, a development much to be welcomed. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 18 

56. South Africa's adherence to the NPT and Algeria's declared intention to do the same 
raised the expectation that Africa too would soon become a nuclear-weapon-free zone. At 
its thirty-seventh regular session, the General Conference had requested him to continue to 
assist the African States in their efforts towards establishing an African nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. That assistance had been given and, in May 1994, the group of United Nations and 
OAU experts had reached agreement on the draft text of a treaty establishing such a zone. 
The text entrusted the Agency with the task of verification. 
57. Another area of increasing Agency safeguards activity was the newly independent 
States of the former Soviet Union. All those countries - with the exception, of course, of 
the Russian Federation - had declared their intention either to become or to remain nonnuclear-
weapon States. So far, nine had acceded to the NPT. The Board had recently 
approved the text of a safeguards agreement with Ukraine, which included provisions for the 
application of safeguards by the Agency to all nuclear material under the jurisdiction or 
control of Ukraine. In preparing for full implementation of safeguards in the newly 
independent States, the Agency had provided assistance with the establishment of State 
systems of accounting for and control of nuclear material, and advice on physical protection 
and on mechanisms for reporting of imports and exports relevant to safeguards. To date, 
nearly 30 fact-finding missions and technical visits had been carried out for that purpose. 
58. At the United Nations General Assembly in September 1993, President Clinton had 
stated that the United States would pursue new steps to control nuclear weapons material and, 
during their meeting in Moscow in January 1994, President Clinton and President Yeltsin had 
agreed on the establishment of a joint working group to consider, inter alia, steps to ensure 
the transparency and irreversibility of the process of reduction of nuclear weapons, including 
the possibility of putting a portion of the fissionable material under Agency safeguards. 
59. Against that background, the United States had begun a process aimed at the eventual 
submission to Agency inspection of all United States fissile material no longer needed for 
defence requirements. Locations where such material was to be stored and presented for 
Agency inspection over the coming few years had already been identified. Discussions had 
taken place between the Agency and the United States on legal, technical and financial 
aspects of the safeguards which were to be applied within the framework of the safeguards 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 19 

agreement between the Agency and the United States and there had been an exchange of 
letters to take account of particular aspects of the arrangement. In that exchange of letters, 
the United States had confirmed its intention not to withdraw such material for any purpose 
related to nuclear weapons or nuclear explosives. An initial inspection had recently been 
carried out at a storage site in Oak Ridge and that was a positive and encouraging 
development. However, long-term solutions would have to be found to issues concerning 
the management and financing of such arrangements. 

60. In December 1993, the United Nations General Assembly had adopted, without a 
vote, a resolution which recommended the negotiation in the most appropriate international 
forum of a non-discriminatory, multilateral and internationally and effectively verifiable 
treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear 
explosive devices. That resolution also requested the Agency to provide assistance with the 
examination of verification arrangements for such a treaty as required. Pursuant to that 
request, he had established a working group within the Secretariat which was examining 
relevant issues and preparing background papers on verification of a so-called cut-off 
agreement in order to ensure that the Agency was able to provide prompt and sound advice. 
61. During the past year, the Agency had been invited to provide information about the 
Agency's infrastructure and technical expertise in connection with discussions on the 
verification arrangements for a comprehensive test ban treaty. Presentations had been made 
on the Agency's experience in radionuclide monitoring and on-site inspections as relevant to 
such a treaty. The Agency's Secretariat believed that a verification role under a 
comprehensive test ban treaty would be consistent with the Agency's mandate and would fit 
in well with the Agency's current activities in the field of nuclear non-proliferation. Indeed, 
there was an obvious overlap between the commitment by a State not to test a nuclear 
weapon or other nuclear explosive device and a non-proliferation commitment by the same 
State not to use nuclear material for weapons or explosive purposes. The Agency's 
verification activities under comprehensive safeguards agreements were therefore directly 
relevant to verification of compliance with a test ban agreement. Any non-compliance with 
a comprehensive test ban treaty would also mean that there was non-compliance with a 
comprehensive safeguards agreement, and both violations would be reported to the Security 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 20 

Council. The establishment of a new organization to verify obligations under a 
comprehensive test ban treaty, the objective of which was in part identical to that of nonproliferation 
treaties, could lead to complications and would undoubtedly prove more costly 
than using the Agency for both regimes. 

62. The international community had been much alarmed by recent cases of illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials. Over the past year, the Secretariat had recorded many 
incidents which needed to be followed up. Fortunately, information received indicated that 
only small quantities had been involved and in no case did the material appear to have come 
from a nuclear weapons stockpile. That did not mean that the problem was not a serious 
one. Uncontrolled movement of nuclear material clearly involved both radiation safety and 
proliferation risks. 
63. There had been extensive discussions among States in recent weeks with a view to 
finding remedies to the trafficking problem. The Agency's Secretariat had also consulted 
many Member States exposed to trafficking in order to identify ways in which the Agency 
might help mitigate the problem. There seemed to be wide agreement that preventing 
diversion at the sources was crucial and that nuclear material accounting and control together 
with physical protection systems were central to such prevention. The Agency had been 
active for many years in arranging for training, providing expert advice and co-ordinating 
the elaboration of guidelines in those two areas. With adequate resources, those efforts could 
be expanded without delay. Furthermore, the Agency's current system of collecting and 
analysing information obtained from the media and Member States could be improved 
significantly so as to allow systematic reporting to Member States in order to help them to 
separate fact from fiction and provide a basis for assessing the real extent of the problem. 
In order to promote more systematic consideration of ideas from Member States regarding 
additional Agency activities to help combat trafficking, he was prepared to convene a round 
table of Government experts that could recommend specific action which could be taken 
promptly. 
64. It was clear that the Agency's existing programmes continued to fulfil an important 
role and that some new responsibilities would have to be assumed to meet emerging new 
requirements of Member States. It was entirely appropriate to insist that existing resources 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 21 

be used well and only for activities to which Governments accorded high priority, before 
additional resources were requested. The Agency had a good record in that regard. It had 
refined the preparation process for its programme and budget with a view to redirecting 
resources to higher-priority activities. It was strengthening monitoring and evaluation of 
programmes in order to ensure efficient delivery and better assessment of impact. The 
Agency was moving to a programme-based accounting system, which would also help it 
focus on programme delivery. It had mastered a long cash crisis and had been able to 
implement progressively activities which had had to be deferred as a result of late payment 
of contributions. As of 1995, the Agency would, once again, be implementing close to the 
full approved programme and budget for that year. Those developments had all contributed 
to strengthening the Agency's main activities and had created a good basis for the Agency 
to assume new responsibilities, if Governments so decided. 

65. However, if the Agency was to meet current and expected demands successfully, 
more adequate, orderly and predictable financing was needed. Many important activities 
were currently only possible because of extrabudgetary support from some Member States. 
That was not a desirable long-term solution. A new understanding among Governments was 
needed to secure adequate and timely funding for the full range of current and new activities 
which the Agency was being called on to undertake. 
66. Turning to the question of staffing, he said that the reports which had been submitted 
to the Conference on the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat demonstrated that the Agency 
was gradually achieving greater diversity in staff recruitment. Proportionally more 
Professional staff came from developing countries, and there were proportionally more 
Professional female staff. That was a positive development and the process had to continue. 
67. He was indebted to the staff of the Agency and was glad to head a team of 
Professional and General Service staff which had proved capable of meeting successfully the 
many challenges of the past year. Through dedicated hard work and with only a minimal 
increase in numbers, that team had managed to respond to the growing demands which 
Member States had placed on the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 22 

68. In closing, he thanked the Austrian Government and the City of Vienna for their 
continued efforts to facilitate the Agency's smooth operation and to make the life of the 
Agency's many visitors and resident international civil servants safe, comfortable and 
enjoyable. 
STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL OF THE FOOD AND AGRICULTURE 
ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

69. The PRESIDENT, recalling the close co-operation for many years between the 
Agency and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, invited Mr. Diouf, 
Director General of the FAO, to address the Conference in commemoration of the thirtieth 
anniversary of the setting up of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food 
and Agriculture and the joint endeavour by the two organizations to promote world food 
production. 
70. Mr. DIOUF (Director General of the FAO) expressed his pleasure at attending 
the Agency's General Conference again for the first time since 1981, when he had been a 
delegate of his country to the General Conference. In the intervening period, he had 
followed the Agency's activities and important missions in international affairs. The Agency 
played a crucial role in improving nuclear safety and developing its safeguards system, the 
importance of which had been highlighted by recent events. 
71. However, there was more to the work of the Agency. Its Statute called for it to 
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity 
throughout the world. He believed that it was by increasing and preserving food supplies and 
contributing to improved health that the Agency would leave its greatest mark. There was 
a great deal of fascination associated with the application of nuclear technology to the 
solution of man's most basic need, namely the need to be adequately fed. The application 
of nuclear techniques to all links in the food production chain had enormously enhanced the 
sophistication of food production methods, resulting in immense benefits to farmers, 
consumers and society as a whole. 
72. Most United Nations gatherings and the Governments of Member States continually 
launched appeals for more co-operation among United Nations agencies, for less overlapping 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 23 

and duplication and for more harmony in their approach. It was therefore a source of great 
pride and satisfaction for the FAO to be celebrating the thirtieth anniversary of its extremely 
successful and harmonious co-operation with the Agency. Since the creation of the Joint 
FAO/IAEA Division in 1964, all activities in nuclear applications for food and agriculture 
in the United Nations system had been conceived, planned and executed jointly by the FAO 
and the Agency. All programmes and activities carried out by the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
were subjected to scrutiny and approval by the governing bodies of both organizations, 
implicitly providing endorsement from the world's ministries of agriculture and atomic 
energy authorities. 

73. Although the Joint FAO/IAEA Division was one of the best examples of interagency 
co-operation within the whole United Nations system, close and harmonious co-operation and 
sophisticated technologies would not amount to much if Member States did not enjoy the 
benefits. 
74. Reviewing the thirty years' co-operation, he was impressed by the great number of 
real benefits which had been derived from the use of nuclear technology in food and 
agricultural research and development. The most notable example was the eradication of the 
New World screw worm from Libya in 1991. As an African, he was extremely concerned 
at what might have happened if the fly had crossed the Sahara and become endemic in the 
African tropics and subtropics, playing havoc with the livestock industry and with wildlife, 
and posing a great threat to human health. The ingenious application of radiation-induced 
sterilization and the release of tens of millions of sterile flies each week in the affected areas 
had very swiftly led to total eradication, saving the African continent from a formidable 
threat. That achievement, which was the result of close and harmonious teamwork by the 
FAO and the Agency, served as an example for future co-operation attempts to use that 
technique to eradicate or control a number of insect pests. 
75. In the revised programme of work for the FAO, approved by the FAO Council in 
June, one of the priority areas was the Emergency Prevention System for Transboundary 
Animal and Plant Pests and Diseases, a programme for combatting pests and diseases in 
livestock and crops. Great importance was attached to the role of radiation sterilization of 
insects in controlling or eradicating pests, such as the tsetse fly in Africa or the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 24 

Mediterranean fruit fly, which had already been eradicated from Mexico and was currently 
being eradicated from Argentina, Chile and Guatemala. 

76. In the past, the chief means of controlling insects had been to apply chemical 
insecticides. However, their indiscriminate use could pose a grave threat to human health 
and the environment. The FAO had therefore taken steps to regulate the trade and use of 
pesticides and to provide international laboratory standards, quality control instruction and 
training to chemists from developing countries to enable each importing country to analyse 
and control the chemical composition and quality of imported pesticides. He had suggested 
to the Agency that a joint training centre and reference service for food quality and pesticide 
control should be established. 
77. He was also keen to explore the possibility of expanding co-operation with the Agency 
in the field of biotechnology, where nuclear techniques played such a crucial role. The 
unique presence within the Agency of an effective joint agricultural laboratory created 
interesting possibilities for providing better assistance and advice to developing Member 
States with respect to molecular biology and biotechnology applications to promote 
agricultural development. 
78. Apart from sterilizing flies, radiation was also very effective in generating new 
variability in crops. Thirty years previously, there had been very few examples of successful 
applications of radiation in mutation breeding. However, with the development of that 
technique and as a result of the fruitful co-operation between the two organizations, almost 
2000 plant varieties created through the use of induced mutations had been released to 
growers worldwide. In some countries, mutant varieties had become the leading ones for 
cultivation, providing enormous economic benefits to farmers and society as a whole. 
79. The other main thrust of the FAO programme of work presented to the FAO Council 
the previous June had been to increase food production in low-income countries, particularly 
in the African continent, where there were food shortages. An appropriate programme was 
currently being formulated and would begin in 1995 with demonstrations in a number of 
selected countries of how crop yields could be drastically increased with proper inputs, 
agricultural management and water control techniques. He noted with great satisfaction that 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 25 

the Agency had offered to support that initiative by undertaking to monitor and evaluate the 
results from field trials with the aid of radioactive and stable isotope tracer techniques. He 
intended to widen the approach to include research and development activities for both crops 
and livestock and looked forward to closer and more effective use of the joint programme 
to promote food security. 

80. There were still formidable challenges to be faced, however, in the efforts to ensure 
food security for all. There were currently 800 million people deprived of adequate access 
to food. Unless drastic measures were taken, that number would increase rapidly. The 
current world population of 5.6 billion was expected to increase to some 9 billion by 2030. 
In order to feed the current starving population and an additional 3.5 billion persons, food 
production would need to be doubled. To do that on a sustainable basis and without further 
harm to the environment, all available intellectual skills and efforts would have to be 
combined through research and development to discover the proper inputs, devise the proper 
systems and ensure the proper management of resources. It was not only a matter of 
increasing food production. Up to 30% of food was ruined by insects and microbes after 
harvest. Here again, the use of nuclear technology could go a long way to reducing those 
enormous losses and improving the wholesomeness of food. 
81. Nuclear science and technology, together with other advanced scientific disciplines, 
and particularly the new biotechnologies, would play a crucial and perhaps indispensable role 
in the future. The FAO and the Agency should build upon three decades of joint efforts and 
fruitful co-operation to help secure adequate food supplies for the growing world population. 
Congratulating the staff of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division on the thirtieth anniversary, he 
pledged his wholehearted support for the joint programme with the Agency and trusted that 
it would continue to be a model of interagency co-operation in the United Nations system, 
promoting the use of nuclear technology to fulfil the food and agriculture research and 
development goals of Member States. 
VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND 
CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1995 

82. The PRESIDENT said that the Agency's policy-making bodies had, 
since 1982, followed the practice of recommending indicative planning figures to be used in 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 26 

establishing annual targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF. In 1992 the Board had 
agreed on increases in the targets for voluntary contributions to the TACF from $52.5 million 
in 1992 to $55.5 million in 1993, $58.5 million in 1994 and $61.5 million in 1995. 
Accordingly, in the draft resolution relating to the TACF, contained in Annex VI to 
document GC(XXXVIII)/5, the Board recommended the figure of $61.5 million as the target 
for voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1995. 

83. Early pledging of voluntary contributions greatly helped the Secretariat in planning 
technical assistance programmes. He therefore urged all delegations that were in a position 
to do so, but had not done so as yet, to notify the Secretariat during the current session of 
the voluntary contributions that their Governments would be making to the TACF in 1995. 
84. He would report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, on the voluntary 
contributions which had been pledged up to that time, and was confident that he would then 
be in a position to report favourably on the percentage of the 1995 target figure already 
pledged. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 

85. Mr. NZO (South Africa) pointed out that it was a great honour to stand before 
the General Conference as the representative of a completely free, non-racial and democratic 
South Africa that was based on universal equality and justice. The establishment of the 
Government of National Unity following the April 1994 elections was one of the most 
significant events in African and world history. 
86. The ending of apartheid represented not only the attainment of human dignity and 
self-respect for all South Africans, it was also a major achievement in the context of the 
global effort to combat racism. South Africa had shown how a country riven by diversity 
and conflict could, through negotiation and a spirit of reconciliation, produce a new nation 
that was united and at peace. 
87. The democratic transformation, which had been brought about by the efforts of all 
South Africans, would not have been possible without the consistent support and 
encouragement of the international community. For its part, the Agency had played a 
constructive role in that process by adopting a number of resolutions intended to help bring 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 27 

apartheid to an end. South Africa was now a member of the Organization of African Unity, 
the Commonwealth, the Non-Aligned Movement and the Group of 77 and, within its own 
region, had recently joined the Southern African Development Community (SADC). South 
Africa had also resumed its seat at the United Nations General Assembly and, with the lifting 
of a number of embargoes, South Africa's relations with a number of United Nations 
organizations had become fully normalized. 

88. Turning to nuclear-related matters, he said it was essential that the review and 
extension of the NPT in 1995 should result in the strengthening of the Treaty and the further 
promotion of non-proliferation and disarmament, objectives to which South Africa was deeply 
committed. South Africa was unique in the sense that it had voluntarily terminated its 
nuclear weapons programme and had destroyed the weapons that it had developed. The 
verification by the Agency and the international community of the information provided by 
South Africa in that respect had brought the vision of an African nuclear-weapon-free zone 
closer to reality. Furthermore, South Africa had contributed to the negotiations to draft a 
treaty to establish such a zone, which it believed would help lay the foundations for a future 
free of the threat of nuclear devastation. South Africa was equally committed to the 
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction, as demonstrated by the fact that it had signed 
the Chemical Weapons Convention and the Biological Weapons Convention. 
89. South Africa's internationally acknowledged advanced nuclear industry had an 
integrated nuclear fuel cycle that included a significant uranium mining industry, a 20 MW 
reactor for isotope production, a 1900 MW nuclear power plant, waste and spent fuel storage 
and disposal facilities, facilities for the extensive production of isotopes for use in research, 
agriculture, industry and medicine, facilities for commercial food irradiation and other 
nuclear-related activities. South Africa was the leading African producer and exporter of 
radioisotopes for medical and industrial uses. 
90. South Africa was willing to share its technology and know-how with other countries, 
particularly those in Africa, within the framework of the peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy. In 1995 South Africa would be hosting an African regional information seminar on 
co-operation with the Agency, in addition to the annual AFRA conference and an 
international conference on radiation protection and radioactive waste management in the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 28 

mining and mineral processing industries. The possibility of siting an African regional 
repository for spent radioactive sources in South Africa was under discussion. South Africa 
was fortunate in having a repository for low- and intermediate-level nuclear waste that was 
the equal of any such facility anywhere else in the world. 

91. He welcomed the fact that the General Conference would have before it a draft 
resolution on the participation of South Africa in the Agency's activities. Having lost its 
designation as a member for the area of Africa in 1976 owing to the unacceptability of the 
apartheid regime, democratic South Africa was once again ready to play a full role in all 
organs of the Agency. 
92. Turning to the issue of nuclear and radiation safety, he said South Africa had always 
maintained strong regulatory control over its civil nuclear fuel cycle activities and had taken 
further steps in recent years to ensure their independence and effectiveness. His country was 
willing to make its experience and expertise in such matters available to the countries of its 
region. South Africa had always viewed nuclear safety as a matter of the utmost importance, 
and during the current session of the General Conference it would be one of the first 
countries to sign the Convention on Nuclear Safety. It was committed to fulfilling its 
obligations under the Convention. However, it felt strongly that the Convention should not 
be limited to land-based civil nuclear power plants, but should cover all civil and military 
installations and radioactive waste management facilities. 
93. While South Africa welcomed the continual increase in the number of countries 
joining the Agency, it urged all Member States to accede to the NPT and, where applicable, 
sign comprehensive safeguards agreements with the Agency. However, without the 
necessary political will and moral integrity, all agreements, including the NPT, were 
meaningless. The world needed total commitment to the elimination of all weapons of mass 
destruction. For its part, South Africa had changed the nuclear sword into a nuclear 
ploughshare and was committed to making the world a safer place. 
94. Ms. TANAKA (Japan) said that with the expected increase in the world's 
population to ten billion by the middle of the twenty-first century, action had to be taken to 
assure energy supplies. However, in doing so, care should be taken not to waste valuable 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 29 

natural resources and attention should be paid to environmental considerations. The peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy would undoubtedly have an important role to play in solving a number 
of problems in the twenty-first century. 

95. In June, the Atomic Energy Commission of Japan had established a new long-term 
programme for research, development and utilization of nuclear energy based on Japan's twin 
objectives of using nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes and of ensuring the 
safety of its applications. The programme set forth four fundamental policies for the 
development and utilization of nuclear power: the implementation of nuclear policies 
appropriate for a nation devoted solely to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy; the creation 
of a more reliable, efficient and safer system for the generation of nuclear power and 
development of solutions to the problem of radioactive waste management; the gradual 
implementation of long-term fuel recycling programmes, while respecting the principles of 
holding no surplus plutonium and of maintaining transparency; and the promotion of nuclear 
science and technology and strengthening of basic research in areas such as medicine, 
agriculture and environmental conservation. 
96. Turning to efforts to prevent proliferation, she stressed the importance for world 
peace and security of preventing the emergence of a new nuclear-weapon State and urged 
nations that had not ratified the NPT to join the regime as non-nuclear-weapon States. Japan 
supported the indefinite extension of the NPT for three reasons: because stabilization of the 
non-proliferation regime was vital to achieve world peace and security; because maintaining 
and strengthening the NPT regime would contribute to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and to the development of smooth, co-operative international relations; and because Japan 
adhered to the principles of not possessing, not producing, and not introducing nuclear 
weapons into its territory. Her country hoped that as many parties to the Treaty as possible 
would support its indefinite extension. Japan sought the ultimate elimination of nuclear 
weapons and once again urged the nuclear-weapon States to endeavour to make further 
reductions in their stockpiles of nuclear weapons. 
97. Work to strengthen the Agency's safeguards system and to improve its efficiency was 
crucial to preserve and strengthen the non-proliferation regime, to maintain the credibility 
of the safeguards system itself, and to make optimum use of limited resources in a time of 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
. page 30 

budgetary austerity. Japan welcomed the improvements made in the field of special 
inspections, early provision of design information and the creation of the nuclear material and 
equipment reporting scheme. 

98. With regard to the implementation of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK, Japan 
strongly supported the efforts of the Agency's Secretariat and the nations concerned to solve 
the problem. The agreement had not been fully implemented owing to a lack of co-operation 
on the part of the DPRK and consequently it had not been possible to confirm that there had 
been no diversion for military purposes. Japan called upon the DPRK to act in accordance 
with the statement it had made jointly with the United States in August; to clarify its position 
with regard to the NPT; and to implement fully its safeguards agreement and the Joint 
Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. Japan also regretted the 
DPRK's withdrawal from the Agency and hoped that it would rejoin. 
99. In order to reduce fears about nuclear proliferation in the countries of the former 
Soviet Union, it would be essential to place the nuclear material obtained following the 
dismantling of nuclear weapons under strict control. As part of its efforts to support 
denuclearization and to improve the control of nuclear material in the former Soviet Union, 
Japan was currently co-operating with the Russian Federation in areas such as the storage of 
nuclear material resulting from the dismantling of weapons and had also indicated its 
intention to co-operate with Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus in establishing their State 
systems of accounting for and control of nuclear materials. Japan welcomed the approval 
of the safeguards agreement between Ukraine and the Agency by the Board of Governors the 
previous week and hoped that Ukraine would accede to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon 
State. 
100. The international community's attention had been drawn to the problems associated 
with the control of nuclear material derived from the dismantling of nuclear weapons and the 
issue of the management of plutonium and highly enriched uranium. Japan attached great 
importance to the need to increase transparency, enhance international understanding, and 
eliminate international concerns regarding plutonium utilization. In that connection, it would 
continue to play an active part in developing an international framework to improve 
transparency in that area. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 31 

101. Her country was extremely concerned about the illegal trafficking of sensitive nuclear 
material recently disclosed in Germany. All countries should co-operate in order to prevent 
illegal trafficking of such material from leading to the spread of nuclear explosive devices 
and the matter should be discussed in the Agency. 
102. Safety was of crucial importance in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, 
and, as one of the parties to have participated actively in its formulation, Japan welcomed 
the adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which was the first legally binding 
international framework to ensure the safety of civil nuclear power plants. Japan sincerely 
hoped that as many nations as possible would sign the Convention, which would foster a 
nuclear safety culture in the signatory States and raise the overall level of nuclear safety. 
103. Although it deeply regretted the Russian Federation's dumping of radioactive waste 
in the Sea of Japan in October 1993 in contravention of existing international obligations, 
Japan welcomed the increased co-operation with the Republic of Korea and the Russian 
Federation on that subject. The Russian Federation had the primary responsibility for the 
storage and treatment of its radioactive waste. However, in view of the difficult conditions 
in that country, Japan was prepared to co-operate in the construction of facilities to store and 
treat such waste. It was to be hoped that there would be no further cases of such dumping 
of radioactive waste. 
104. The Agency's activities in the area of technical co-operation, which had greatly 
contributed to the spread of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries were 
very important and Japan would continue to contribute to them as far as possible. It also 
intended to play a more active part, despite its financial difficulties, in assiting the Agency 
in its crucial role in the formation of a new world peace order. 
105. Mr. JIANG (China) said that there had been several new developments in the 
field of international co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear nonproliferation. 
The international community had achieved significant progress by concluding 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The Agency's financial situation had improved generally 
and the increase in the total financial resources available for technical co-operation had been 
particularly gratifying. Member States were paying more attention to strengthening the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 32 

effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system and the Secretariat had also 
been working hard on the development of Programme 93+2. The Agency had achieved 
fruitful results in helping the East European and CIS countries to apply safeguards to their 
peaceful nuclear activities, to improve the safety of their nuclear facilities and to eliminate 
radioactive contamination. Another encouraging sign was that many Member States had 
requested assistance from the Agency in carrying out studies related to energy and electricity 
planning and nuclear power feasibility. Furthermore, model technical assistance projects, 
aimed at better meeting the development priorities and needs of Member States, had been set 
up. 

106. There was, however, still an imbalance between the Agency's promotional and 
regulatory activities. A number of promotional activities were still failing to make 
satisfactory progress and some were at a standstill. China was concerned that, in recent 
years, there had even been attempts to weaken the Agency's promotional functions in the 
name of nuclear non-proliferation. China wholeheartedly supported the complete prohibition 
and total destruction of nuclear weapons. It did not advocate, encourage or engage in the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons; nor would it ever assist any other country to develop 
nuclear weapons. China believed that the NPT should be made more universal and the 
Agency's safeguards system more effective. Although non-proliferation and the promotion 
of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were closely related, nuclear non-proliferation should 
not be pursued to the detriment of the legitimate rights and demands for the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy of Member States, especially the developing countries. It should also not 
be used to limit the development of nuclear technology and a nuclear energy industry in those 
countries. One-sided advocation of non-proliferation not only ran counter to the aims and 
principles set forth in the Agency's Statute, but also to the fundamental objectives of 
the NPT. 
107. China therefore felt that a balanced approach should be adopted in strengthening the 
Agency's technical assistance activities and its safeguards system. The Agency should make 
greater efforts to redress the present imbalance and promote technical assistance and 
co-operation in the developing countries. In doing so, it should continue its efforts to 
elaborate technical assistance and co-operation programmes which best suited the specific 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 33 

conditions of the developing countries and which were adapted to national development goals 
and strategies. The concept of model projects was a valuable experiment in accommodating 
national priorities and achieving greater economic and social impact. The Agency should 
remove any unreasonable restrictions on nuclear technology transfer and help the developing 
countries acquire expertise in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Only in that way could 
favourable conditions be created for the establishment and development of a new relationship 
in international nuclear co-operation. Furthermore, the Agency should play a more positive 
role in supporting co-operation between developing countries and improving their collective 
and individual self-reliance. China hoped that the Secretariat would continue its consultations 
with Member States, especially the developing countries, to develop practical technical 
assistance strategies and improve co-operation. 

108. China was fortunate in having rich uranium resources and its own design and 
construction capabilities. After forty years of development, China's nuclear industry had 
acquired a complete nuclear fuel cycle system and was now entering a new phase. The 
300 MW(e) reactor at the Qinshan power plant, designed and built in China, was now 
operating well. Following the successful operation of Unit 1 of the Daya Bay nuclear power 
plant, Unit 2 had started commercial operation in May 1994. In order to meet the demand 
for electricity, China planned to start construction of nuclear projects in Guangdong and 
Zhejiang provinces. The total capacity under construction was expected to reach 
8000-10 000 MW(e) by the year 2000. 
109. As China continued to open up to the outside world, international co-operation in the 
field of nuclear power, including co-operation with the Agency, constituted an integral part 
of its development. China would continue to follow the principle of seeking foreign 
co-operation while emphasizing self-reliance. It was grateful for the assistance given by the 
Agency in recent years in the construction of the Qinshan power plant in the fields of 
personnel training, project management, quality assurance, commissioning, operation 
management and emergency response. It hoped that the Agency would increase its efforts 
to assist in the development of nuclear energy and support the nuclear power industries of 
Member States, especially the developing countries. China also hoped that the Agency would 
further expand the scope of its assistance in the transfer of nuclear technology. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 34 

110. The guiding principle of China's nuclear power industry had always been to give the 
highest priority to quality and safety. High levels of nuclear safety were the basis of 
sustainable and smooth development of nuclear power. Conversely, maintaining a strong 
momentum in nuclear power development brought advances in nuclear safety technology. 
In recent years, the Agency had done much commendable work in the field of nuclear safety, 
notably in formulating nuclear safety standards and carrying out operational safety reviews 
of nuclear power plants. It was important, however, to ensure that nuclear safety and the 
development of nuclear power were promoted in conjunction, without undue emphasis on the 
former. Furthermore, assistance given by the international community to improve nuclear 
safety in East European and CIS countries should not detract from assistance to other 
Member States. 
111. In the ten years that China had been a member of the Agency, the Agency and China 
had conducted fruitful exchanges in the fields of nuclear power construction, nuclear safety, 
radiation protection, application of nuclear technology and basic physical and chemical 
research. In addition to the traditional forms of co-operation (equipment provision, scientific 
visits, research contracts) there had been initiatives in areas such as joint research, technical 
advisory services and assessment, and training courses. Thanks to Agency assistance, a 
number of training centres had been established in China. China welcomed scientific and 
technical personnel from developing countries for research and training and had made 
Chinese experts available for Agency programmes. The importance attached by China to its 
co-operation with the Agency was reflected in its timely payment of its Regular Budget and 
voluntary contributions. Moreover, China had provided contributions in kind for RCA 
projects and had decided to donate an extra $1 million to the Agency to help finance model 
projects in other developing countries. 
112. Over the past ten years, China had also co-operated extensively with the Agency in 
the field of nuclear non-proliferation and safeguards. China had concluded a safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and had signed the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. In March 1992, China had formally acceded to the NPT, thus 
demonstrating its sincere determination to ensure peace and stability in the world. To 
facilitate the Agency's safeguards activities, China had undertaken to report all its imports 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 35 

and exports of nuclear material and exports of nuclear equipment and non-nuclear materials. 
China followed international practices and exercised strict control over its exports. 

113. After more than two years of negotiation, the Convention on Nuclear Safety had 
finally been concluded. Despite the fact that some imbalance in certain provisions remained, 
the Convention had gained the broad support of Member States. The Chinese Government 
intended to sign the Convention after the necessary legal procedures had been completed. 
China would strictly fulfil its obligations under the Convention and take an active part in 
internationally co-ordinated actions aimed at strengthening nuclear safety. 
114. China supported the Agency's endeavours to strengthen the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the safeguards system and believed that the system should be just, objective, 
reasonable, transparent and practicable. It should be able to deter and detect any noncompliance, 
and redress any such instance. China had always maintained that the underlying 
aim of improving the effectiveness of safeguards should be to build confidence. Any 
measures adopted should be in strict conformity with the Statute and other relevant 
international legal instruments, should respect State sovereignty, and ensure the equal status, 
rights and obligations of all countries. In view of the complex nature of international 
relations, a vigilant guard should be kept against the possible abuse of environmental 
monitoring. 
115. China supported the Agency's decision to give high priority to activities related to the 
practical application of food irradiation and economical production of potable water and was 
prepared to participate actively in technical exchanges and industrial co-operation in that 
area. 
116. The recent increase in illicit trafficking of nuclear material in Europe was a matter 
of concern to the international community. As a signatory of the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material, China attached great importance to the control and protection 
of nuclear material and was opposed to any form of illicit trafficking. The Agency had a 
role to play in addressing that problem and Governments and the international community 
should join efforts to stop such trafficking. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.l 
page 36 

117. As a developing Member State, China naturally hoped that the Agency would adapt 
to the new international situation and deal with the important issues related to international 
co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and nuclear non-proliferation in a 
balanced and just manner. It was the Agency's fundamental task to ensure the 
comprehensive implementation of the principles of its Statute. China, together with other 
Member States, was willing to make every effort to help the Agency fulfil that noble task. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 
(resumed) 

118. The PRESIDENT said that agreement had been reached in the African Group 
on its nominations for the General Committee and accordingly he proposed that, under 
Rule 34 of the Rules of Procedure, the delegate of Tunisia be elected as a Vice-President of 
the General Conference and that, under Rule 40, the delegate of Namibia be elected as an 
additional member of the General Committee. 
119. It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
9 January 1995 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERALCONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE SECOND PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 19 September 1994, at 3.10 p.m. 
President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
8 General debate and annual report for 1993 (resumed) 1 -64 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Germany 
United States of America 
France 
Russian Federation 
Lebanon 
United Kingdom 
1 - 12 
13-25 
26-37 
38-46 
47-55 
56-64 

[*] GC(XXXVEI)/1 and Add.l and 2. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 I/Rev.2. 
94-03826 (X) 


GC(XXXVIII)OR.2 
page 2 

ABACC 

Basic Safety 

Standards 

DPRK 

EBRD 

ECU 

EURATOM 
G-7 
G-24 

MOX 
NATO 
NPT 
OECD 

SAGSI 

START 

TACF 

Tlatelolco Treaty 

USA 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 

International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 

European currency unit 

European Atomic Energy Community 
Group of Seven 
Group of Twenty-Four 

Mixed oxide 
North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 

Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 

Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 

Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 

the Caribbean 

United States of America 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.1) 
(resumed) 

1. Mr. ZILLER (Germany), speaking on behalf of the European Union, said that 
despite the various approaches of its Member States to nuclear energy related matters, the 
European Union remained strongly committed to international co-operation on the peaceful 
and safe use of nuclear energy. With facilities covering the whole of the nuclear fuel cycle 
and generating about one third of the world's nuclear electricity, and with a safeguards 
system independent of national authorities and the EURATOM Supply Agency and the Joint 
European Research Programme, the main activities of which related to nuclear safety, fusion 
and safeguards, the Member States of the European Union felt a particularly strong 
responsibility for promoting nuclear non-proliferation and safety worldwide. 
2. The strengthening of the international non-proliferation regime was among the chief 
priorities of the common foreign and security policy of the European Union defined in the 
Maastricht Treaty and the 1993 Annual Report rightly highlighted the continuing efforts of 
Member States and of the Secretariat to that end. Recalling its initiatives aimed at 
reaffirming the Agency's right to conduct special inspections and at establishing a universal 
reporting scheme, the European Union urged all Member States which had not yet done so 
to join and to implement that scheme in order to provide the Agency with a comprehensive 
picture of all international nuclear transfers. Furthermore, the European Union looked 
forward to the results of the programme to further strengthen the safeguards system, which 
the Director General intended to submit to the Board early in the following year, as that 
would enable a conceptual framework to be defined and concrete steps to be taken to 
strengthen the effectiveness and improve the efficiency of the system as a whole. A political 
debate was necessary to give safeguards activities an adequate financial basis. At the same 
time, the Agency had to concentrate its resources on priority areas so as to strengthen the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system. The European Union was working 
with the Secretariat to ensure the full implementation of the new partnership approach and 
repeated its request that the Director General prepare a study within Programme 93+2 on 
the criteria which would have to be met by other regional organizations in order to qualify 
for a partner relationship with the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 4 

3. With regard to the application of Agency safeguards in the DPRK, the European 
Union was greatly concerned at the continuing and even increasing non-compliance by that 
country with its obligations both under the NPT and the NPT safeguards agreement. It 
deplored the DPRK's failure to implement the essential elements of Board, General 
Conference and United Nations Security Council resolutions. At the Corfu summit meeting 
in June 1994 the European Union had noted with deep concern that the DPRK had not 
permitted the Agency to complete essential inspection activities, thus making it impossible 
to ascertain whether plutonium had been diverted for non-peaceful purposes. The persistent 
non-compliance with international obligations constituted a serious challenge to the 
international non-proliferation regime and to the safeguards system as a whole. The 
statement by the USA and the DPRK of 12 August 1994 could contribute to a satisfactory 
solution to the problem of safeguarding the DPRK's nuclear programme and its other 
obligations under the NPT. The European Union supported all efforts which, through 
consultation and dialogue, increased the transparency of the DPRK's nuclear programme and 
the stability of the Korean Peninsula. However, it wished to emphasize that its objective 
remained the securing of full compliance by the DPRK with its legal obligations. 
4. Regarding the Agency' s activities relating to the dismantling of the clandestine nuclear 
weapons programme of Iraq, the European Union noted that there had been positive 
developments since the previous session of the General Conference. The Agency and its 
action team, in close co-operation with the United Nations Special Commission and with 
considerable support from the European Union, was continuing to neutralize and eliminate 
Iraq's nuclear weapons potential. Following Iraq's formal acceptance of Security Council 
resolution 715 in November 1993 and given the progress reported by the Special Commission 
since that time, the introduction of a long-term verification system might now be possible. 
That represented a further important contribution to preventing the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction in the Middle East. 
5. The European Union welcomed the evolution of the nuclear non-proliferation policy 
in Latin America, in particular the coming into force in March 1994 of the Quadripartite 
Agreement between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency on the implementation of 
full-scope safeguards. It also noted with satisfaction that the Tlatelolco Treaty had now 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 5 

entered into force for Argentina, Chile and Brazil, thus nearly completing an important 
regional non-proliferation system, and was also pleased at the recent announcement by Cuba 
of its decision to accede to the Tlatelolco Treaty. The next stage should be accession of all 
Latin American countries to the NPT. In that context, the European Union welcomed 
Argentina's decision to take the necessary steps before the end of the year. 

6. The European Union was concerned to note that Ukraine, a major newly independent 
State, had not yet acceded to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State, contrary to the 
commitment it had given in the Lisbon Protocol and had reiterated in the trilateral statement 
(United States, Russian Federation, Ukraine) issued in Moscow in January 1994. While it 
welcomed the comprehensive safeguards agreement between Ukraine and the Agency, that 
agreement was no substitute for Ukraine's rapid accession to the NPT. It therefore repeated 
its appeal to that country to comply fully with its commitments under the Lisbon Protocol 
and to accede to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State. 
7. The European Union was firmly committed to the indefinite and unconditional 
extension of the NPT, an objective which had been officially adopted by the European 
Council in July 1994. It also underlined the importance of universal accession to the NPT 
and therefore called upon all States which had not yet done so to accede to the Treaty as soon 
as possible, preferably before the 1995 Extension Conference. It welcomed the recent 
accession to the NPT by Kazakhstan, Georgia and Kyrgyzstan and the ratification there by 
the Moldovan parliament. In that connection, it was encouraged by the progress being made 
in other important fields of arms control and non-proliferation, notably with regard to a 
comprehensive test ban treaty. It hoped that negotiations on a convention banning the 
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices would 
open in the near future. Appreciating the progress made towards the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, it hoped that the States concerned would reach full 
agreement on all the provisions of the draft treaty soon. Finally, the Middle East peace 
process had made remarkable progress. The European Union strongly encouraged all States 
in the region to join the NPT as a step towards enhancing peace and security through the 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 

GC(XXXVEI)/OR.2 
page 6 

8. Recent cases of illegal transfers and smuggling of plutonium and uranium, sometimes 
of weapons grade, was a matter of serious concern to the Member States of the Union. The 
illicit trade in nuclear materials was a threat to the international system of non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. The European Union urged Member States to apply the relevant legal 
instruments and Agency standards for physical protection and to seek assistance in cases 
where systems of material accounting, control and physical protection or export controls were 
inadequate. The installation of radiation monitoring equipment for border control purposes 
should be considered. For its part, the European Union would make substantial contributions 
to a joint effort in that regard. Given the urgency and importance of the matter, it would 
present a draft resolution to be discussed under the appropriate agenda item. 
9. The European Union attached particular importance to the activities of the Agency in 
the field of nuclear safety and undertook considerable research and development work there 
and in the field of radiation protection and waste management. Between 1994 and 1998 it 
was expected to spend around 160 million ECU on research and development in key aspects 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection. It saw the completion of the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety, which it was proud to have initiated and which would be open for signature 
during the Conference, as a major achievement for the international community. It would 
facilitate harmonization of safety requirements, particularly through the peer review process, 
and would thus enhance nuclear safety worldwide. The European Union hoped that the 
greatest possible number of States, in particular those using nuclear energy, would sign and 
implement the Convention without delay and that its completion would encourage those 
concerned to proceed to the development of a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management. 
10. The European Union and the Agency were co-operating to improve the situation with 
regard to nuclear safety in the States of Central and Eastern Europe and the newlyindependent 
States. Considerable progress had been made since the 1992 G-7 summit in 
Munich, in bilateral and international assistance programmes. The Agency's activities to 
assess the safety of nuclear power plants in those States and to assist the G-24 in coordinating 
its nuclear safety assistance were of great value. At its Corfu summit the 
European Union had recommended a series of measures to Ukraine in the field of nuclear 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 7 

safety and had pledged substantial financial and other assistance to encourage and support 

those measures. The early closure of reactor units 1 and 3 of the Chernobyl nuclear power 

plant and confirmation that unit 2 would not reopen remained high priorities subject to the 

introduction of acceptable alternative energy sources - possibly including new reactors with 

adequate safety standards. Reform of the energy sector, review of nuclear safety regulations 
and ratification by Ukraine of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability and the Joint Protocol 
were also to be seen as vital ingredients of that programme. The European Union would 
make available 100 million ECU in grants and 400 million ECU in loans to support the 
package of measures which had been formally adopted as an Action Plan at the G-7 Naples 
summit in July. The G-7 had pledged US $200 million at the summit and additional funds 
had also been promised by other OECD States. Ukraine was currently considering the 
Action Plan and the European Union hoped that, given the serious concerns about the safety 
situation at Chernobyl, it would provide a basis for prompt decisions leading to the closure 
of that plant. 

11. The report on the Agency' s technical co-operation activities in 1993 mentioned certain 
elements - growth in the TACF and other funding instruments, higher implementation rates 
and increased delivery figures, for example - which showed that planning and programme 
implementation activities were on the right track. The Union considered technical cooperation 
a very high political priority and therefore planned to spend about 230 million ECU 
over four years on research and development projects in developing countries. At the Corfu 
summit it had announced its intention to increase financial assistance to countries in Africa, 
the Caribbean and the Pacific and to strengthen co-operative links with I^atin America. It 
encouraged all measures further to improve programme implementation and to make the 
Agency's assistance more directly relevant to the needs and development priorities of the 
countries concerned. 
12. The policy of real zero growth, although widely advocated, had not yet produced a 
readiness on the part of Member States and the Secretariat to set clear priorities among the 
Agency's programmes, sub-programmes and tasks so as to respond to changing or growing 
needs on the one hand and to unchanged or decreasing levels of resources on the other. That 
process would require a political debate between regional groups and meaningful dialogue 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 8 

with the Secretariat. In the absence of discussion on priorities, the programme budget for 

1995-96 kept within the limits of zero real growth but made little or no provision for new 

and enlarged responsibilities in connection with the review and improvement of the 

safeguards system, which were nevertheless of paramount importance. The problem, 

however, was general and could also affect technical co-operation and nuclear safety. The 

latter field in particular was of global concern and an inherent responsibility of the Agency, 

and should not have to depend increasingly on extrabudgetary funds from only a small 

number of Member States. Finally, bearing in mind the needs of developing countries, the 

European Union reaffirmed its willingness to remain a reliable partner on its own or in 

support of the Agency's efforts in programmes to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear 

energy under international control. 

13. Ms. O'LEARY (United States of America) first of all read out the following 
message from the President of the United States to the General Conference: 

"Since its inception the International Atomic Energy Agency has been at the forefront 
of the international community's efforts to combat the spread of nuclear weapons and 
to promote the peaceful and safe uses of nuclear energy. 

"Nonproliferation is fundamental to the national security and foreign policy of the 
United States. For that reason, the United States strongly supports the indefinite and 
unconditional extension of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1995. An NPT 
of unlimited duration will provide added assurance of international stability and 
security that will permit, under the IAEA safeguards system, continued international 
trade and cooperation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and technology. 

"The IAEA safeguards system is the foundation on which the NPT is established. 
Recent events have highlighted the need for strengthening IAEA safeguards not only 
with respect to declared nuclear activities, but also with respect to the IAEA's ability 
to detect undeclared nuclear activities. 

"IAEA safeguards can also help to promote nuclear disarmament objectives. I 
announced last year that the U.S. would submit fissile material no longer needed for 
our deterrent to inspection by the IAEA. We are now implementing that offer, with 
a submission of approximately 10 tonnes of highly-enriched uranium and the 
commitment that this material will never be used to build nuclear weapons. In 
January, President Yeltsin and I agreed to establish a joint working group to consider 
steps 'to ensure the transparency and irreversibility of the process of reduction of 
nuclear weapons, including the possibility of putting a portion of fissionable material 
under IAEA safeguards.' 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 9 

"The United States is committed to the continuing effort to identify the resources 
necessary to implement existing and new safeguards measures. We encourage other 
member states to join with us in this important task. 

"We endorse the commitment of the international community to improve the safety 
of Soviet-designed reactors. In that vein, the United States applauds the opening for 
signature of the International Nuclear Safety Convention. This Convention provides 
States an opportunity to affirm their commitment to the safe operation and 
construction of nuclear power plants, which is essentially a national responsibility. 

"We welcome the Agency's efforts in its diverse technical programmes, especially its 
efforts to enhance and streamline delivery of technical assistance to developing States, 
which is essential to assuring that the development of nuclear energy remains safe and 
peaceful. 

"I look forward to the continued close cooperation between the United States and the 
IAEA. We approach this 38th session of the General Conference committed to the 
purposes for which the IAEA was founded and determined to help strengthen the 
Agency's ability to fulfill its mandate. On behalf of the people of the United States, 
I extend to you my best wishes for a productive and successful Conference." 

14. The pace of change following the end of the Cold War had been astonishing: the 
United States and Russia no longer threatened each other with nuclear missiles, the prospect 
of an international consensus on the benefits of a nuclear test ban had moved closer than ever 
and the nuclear nations had agreed to be bound by strict international safety norms. The task 
now was to establish new and enduring structures which would assure a more secure and 
technologically advanced world. To that end, new strategies would have to be developed for 
ensuring the safety of civilian nuclear facilities and reducing the dangers posed by the 
world's nuclear arsenal and stockpiles of weapons-usable materials. The strategies for 
improving worldwide nuclear safety were to expand international collaboration, reach 
international agreements on nuclear safety, liability and waste, and improve the safety 
capabilities of nuclear States. To ensure a more secure future, it was essential to extend the 
NPT indefinitely, achieve a permanent nuclear test ban, establish transparent and irreversible 
nuclear disarmament, limit fissile material production and strengthen safeguards and physical 
security relating to nuclear materials. 
15. The international community relied on the Agency to codify and implement those 
strategies around the globe. The tools at its disposal for that purpose were an international 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 

page 10 

and diverse work force, unrestricted access to information, adequate and prioritized funding, 

and technical co-operation. On the side of human resources, it was essential to ensure the 
participation of all, without distinction as to race, religion or sex, in the joint effort, and in 
that regard women in particular had a more important role to play. The target of 50% 
representation of women in the Agency had to be met by the end of the century and the 
Secretariat was to be commended on its strategy for their advancement. The United States 
delegation intended to submit a resolution on that matter to the General Conference and was 
proud to announce that the first scholarship in its programme to train women from 
developing countries would be awarded during the Conference. Openness was a prerequisite 
for the implementation of new strategies for nuclear safety. The international community 
needed to understand the problems at issue and the results achieved if it was to be mobilized. 
The United States would be establishing an international nuclear safety centre in one of the 
Department of Energy's national laboratories to promote ongoing technical exchange with 
the countries of the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe, and to promote 
safety-related technologies. Russia likewise intended to set up an international safety centre 
as an example to other nuclear States. 

16. Openness was also vital for transforming the international security environment. The 
United States had revealed more information about its nuclear weapons programme than any 
other country. It had divulged previously secret information regarding its stockpiles of 
plutonium and highly-enriched uranium, its nuclear tests and the harmful effects of its nuclear 
programmes on human health and the environment. Those revelations served as a deterrent 
to proliferation while at the same time ensuring the necessary transparency for new methods 
of ensuring nuclear safety. Transparency, for example, could assure the world community 
that excess fissile material was not being used to manufacture new nuclear weapons. The 
United States had recently authorized the Agency to conduct inspections at Oak Ridge to 
safeguard excess highly-enriched uranium and intended to continue on that path. Access to 
information also fostered technological advancement; the declassification of information 
regarding inertial confinement fusion, for example, would allow scientists around the world 
to explore that potential future energy source. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 11 

17. The new strategies would require adequate financing and new funding priorities. The 
Agency could not be asked to assume new missions without increases in funding, reallocation 
of existing resources, or both. Before asking Member States to provide additional funds, a 
careful review of the Agency's priorities should be carried out to ensure that those resources 
would be used to the best advantage and, in the realm of safety, allocated to the most urgent 
needs. 
18. Another important tool was technical co-operation. Many countries had benefited 
from the Agency's scientific and technical activities in a wide variety of fields ranging from 
health and agriculture to the environment. The United States supported the Agency's 
programme of technical assistance to developing Member States and encouraged voluntary 
contributions to the Agency's Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund as well as 
contributions in kind. It financed various technical co-operation activities and had entered 
into partnerships with laboratories in developing countries. 
19. However, nuclear energy did not provide only benefits, and the dangers posed by 
some nuclear power reactors were unacceptable and needed to be eliminated. One strategy 
was to adopt new mechanisms for multilateral co-operation on nuclear safety. Systematic 
training programmes for plant operators were an essential element of nuclear safety. The 
United States was involved in training activities for the newly independent States and the 
countries of Central and Eastern Europe. It also worked with partners on programmes aimed 
at reducing the near-term risks of accident in the most dangerous reactors. One example of 
multilateral co-operation in that area was the recent G-7 agreement to close high-risk reactors 
at Chernobyl. Nuclear safety could also be improved by formalizing multilateral cooperation 
through binding international agreements such as the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety, which achieved three objectives: to establish a set of internationally binding 
obligations, to provide for peer review process meetings at least every three years, and to 
confirm the responsibility of national Governments for assuring nuclear safety while 
recognizing the value of international co-operation. The United States delegation looked 
forward to signing that Convention, in whose preparation it had played an active part. Many 
aspects now needed to be defined, such as the form and content of national reports, the 
structure and procedures of the meetings of the parties and the nature of any 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 12 

recommendations on improved compliance. The United States was eager to collaborate in 
that work. 

20. Emphasizing the importance of arrangements governing civil liability for nuclear 
damage, the United States delegation welcomed the steps by several Eastern European 
countries to accede to the Vienna Convention. The United States had also submitted a 
proposal for an umbrella convention on nuclear liability to the Standing Committee on 
Nuclear Liability, and urged other countries to support it. Establishing liability protection 
would allow private Western companies to participate fully in international nuclear safety 
initiatives. As soon as the safety convention had been concluded, attention should be focused 
on the safe management of radioactive waste. Significant political and technical issues 
needed to be addressed but the consensus which had already been achieved on fundamental 
principles provided a good starting point. However, beyond international technical 
collaboration and conventions, it was critical that a strategy should be adopted which would 
allow each country to develop its own safety capabilities. That meant introducing rigorous 
standards for nuclear safety and strong, independent nuclear regulatory bodies to enforce 
them, developing local ability to evaluate and upgrade the safety of nuclear facilities, 
establishing comprehensive training centres for reactor operators, developing the domestic 
capabilities needed to maintain equipment and establishing centres for advancing nuclear 
safety technology. 
21. To make the vision of a nuclear-weapons-free world a reality, new long-term security 
strategies should be created which emphasized disarmament, controls on civilian and military 
fissile materials, and improved safeguarding. The cornerstone of the strategies for stemming 
the spread of nuclear weapons was the NPT. With the Non-Proliferation Treaty Review and 
Extension Conference only seven months away, the United States would make every effort 
to ensure that that Treaty became a permanent part of the global security structure. 
Uncertainty about the Treaty's future could only undermine the confidence needed for taking 
long-term action. As part of its strategy to promote non-proliferation, the United States had 
reopened negotiations on a nuclear test ban treaty. President Clinton had twice extended the 
United States' nuclear testing moratorium and had stated clearly that completing such a treaty 
was an essential step in reducing the danger of nuclear proliferation. The commitment to 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 13 

ending nuclear testing was but one demonstration of the importance attached to the indefinite 
extension of the NPT, the other being the commitment to deep nuclear force reductions. The 
United States continued to implement the nuclear warhead reductions called for in the 
START I Treaty, even though the agreement had not yet been ratified, and remained 
committed to even deeper reductions as called for in the START II Treaty. President Clinton 
had also demonstrated the importance he attached to reducing and eliminating all weapons 
of mass destruction. Furthermore, the fact that the United States and Russia had de-targeted 
their nuclear missiles represented further progress in controlling weapons. The two countries 
were working together to eliminate nuclear weapons from the newly independent States and 
urged the latter to accede to the NPT. In that connection mention should be made of the 
historic trilateral agreement signed by the United States, Russia and Ukraine to remove all 
nuclear weapons from Ukraine. The United States delegation hoped that Ukraine would 
follow the example of Kazakhstan and Belarus by joining the NPT in the near future. 

22. The United States was also endeavouring to increase the transparency and 
irreversibility of the nuclear disarmament process, a major aspect of which was the 
dismantling of nuclear warheads. That process would create considerable amounts of excess 
nuclear material. To demonstrate that that material would not be used to make new 
weapons, the United States had announced its intention to submit the material in question to 
Agency inspections and hoped that the other nuclear powers would follow its example. The 
last stage of disarmament was disposing of the excess nuclear-weapon material; the United 
States had concluded an agreement on the purchase of 500 tons of highly enriched uranium 
from Russian nuclear weapons which it intended to blend down into low-enriched reactor 
fuel. In addition to those measures, the United States supported efforts to end the production 
of fissile materials for nuclear weapons purposes and to that end had concluded an agreement 
with Russia to close down all remaining weapons-grade plutonium production reactors by the 
year 2000. It was also working on a treaty at the Conference on Disarmament to prevent the 
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons. 
23. The proliferation risks posed by civilian uses of weapon-usable fissile materials should 
also be reduced to the absolute minimum. In that connection two problems needed to be 
addressed: the continued use of highly-enriched uranium in civilian research reactors and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 14 

the growing accumulation of separated plutonium in excess of available fuel fabrication 
capacities or amounts needed for projected energy programmes. Under the Reduced 
Enrichment for Research and Test Reactors programme, the United States was honouring its 
promise to take back, particularly from Europe, spent fuel elements with material of 
American origin. That programme was now facing a challenge in a Federal Court which 
could adversely affect the conversion of research reactors to low-enriched uranium, but the 
Government expected to be able to solve the problem. Furthermore, it had begun an 
encouraging dialogue with Russia on the conversion of Russian research reactors to lowenriched 
fuels and looked forward to co-operating with China and South Africa in that effort 
as well. The dialogue on the civilian uses of plutonium was in its early stages. The United 
States policy was nevertheless clear: it did not encourage such use but would respect its 
commitments as a reliable nuclear trading partner. It nevertheless sought to expand its 
dialogue with other countries to explore mutually acceptable means of stemming the 
unneeded accumulation of civil plutonium stockpiles and reducing the existing excess. 

24. International attention had recently been focused on reports of nuclear material 
smuggling and much could be done to improve security in that area. The United States and 
Russia had taken measures to protect their large nuclear material stockpiles, but IAEA 
assistance was essential in co-ordinating the international response. Improving safeguards 
and their adaptation to new challenges were also important. Some quarters had called for 
substantial reductions in the significant quantities of civilian nuclear material to be 
safeguarded, which was a legitimate issue, although the goal should remain comprehensive 
safeguards improvements. The Programme 93+2 being conducted by the Secretariat was 
very useful in that effort and her delegation looked forward to the proposals which would be 
made at the Board of Governors meeting in March 1995. The safeguards improvements 
should also help the Agency in rendering Iraq's weapons facilities and equipment harmless 
and preventing that country from regenerating its activities. The Agency's role in the threat 
of proliferation in the Korean Peninsula had also enhanced the credibility of safeguards. The 
United States was determined that the negotiations which were due to be resumed in Geneva 
with the DPRK would result in compliance by that country with its safeguards commitments 
to the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 15 

25. Lastly, she expressed her confidence that by the end of the twentieth century new 
strategies for nuclear safety and security would be firmly established, and the United States 
delegation anticipated working together with other countries under the auspices of the Agency 
to achieve those results. 
26. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France), associating himself fully with the statement made 
on behalf of the European Union by the delegate of Germany, said that 1995 would be 
marked not only by the Conference of States Parties to the NPT but also by important 
developments in the key areas of the safety of nuclear facilities and the management of the 
back end of the fuel cycle. 
27. It was of prime importance for the NPT to continue to be applied in the future, and 
France reaffirmed its determination to work for its indefinite and unconditional extension. 
France called upon all States Parties to work to that end, and appealed to all those States that 
had not already done so to accede to the Treaty. During the past year several countries 
possessing nuclear installations had acceded to the NPT, and Argentina had decided to sign 
it by the end of 1995. Brazil had ratified the Tlatelolco Treaty, and would perhaps soon be 
joining the community of States Parties to the NPT; finally, it was to be hoped that Cuba 
would shortly be acceding to the Tlatelolco Treaty. The accession of Kazakhstan, which had 
followed that of Belarus, was very welcome, as was the fact that Ukraine had just concluded 
a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency. France hoped that Ukraine would 
soon accede to the NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State, in accordance with the undertakings 
it had made more than two years before. In the Middle East, the recent agreements had 
opened up a new era in a region which had experienced long and painful conflict. France 
gave its encouragement to all efforts made to establish in the Middle East a zone free from 
weapons of mass destruction, and hoped that those efforts would bear fruit with the accession 
by the States of the region to the NPT and the monitoring of their nuclear installations by the 
Agency. Overall, and even taking account of the difficulties which still had to be resolved, 
recent developments had seen - with 165 signatories - accession to the NPT by the vast 
majority of States. Such developments proved that non-proliferation was a major concern 
of virtually all countries, whether or not they were Parties to the Treaty, and meant that the 
1995 Conference could be approached with confidence. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 16 

28. Set against that, the violation by the DPRK of the undertakings it had given under the 
NPT and its refusal to apply the provisions of the agreement it had concluded with the 
Agency were all the more regrettable. The DPRK had to accept the rules of the international 
community and agree that the treaties and agreements it had concluded must be implemented 
in good faith. Faced with such an important question as non-proliferation, it was not possible 
to take refuge behind the unacceptable notion of special status. France trusted that the 
discussions under way between the United States and the DPRK would enable a more 
favourable climate to be created. The Agency must have access to all the nuclear activities 
of the DPRK and to all information regarding the operations the latter had been able to 
undertake in the past, and it must be able to draw up a complete inventory of materials 
treated in that country, including at the two sites which the Agency had not so far been able 
to inspect despite all the efforts that had been made by the Board of Governors and the 
Secretariat. The French delegation paid tribute to the Director General for the vigilance with 
which he was managing the present crisis, for the firmness with which he was endeavouring, 
in spite of all the pressures, to defend the Agency's prerogatives, and for the action he was 
taking to prevent safeguards from becoming a subject for negotiation. The effectiveness of 
the NPT, which was the most important element in the non-proliferation regime, rested on 
a system of control whose main constituent was safeguards. The French delegation actively 
supported the studies being undertaken to strengthen those safeguards, because the Agency 
could not content itself with verifying that there had been no diversion of declared nuclear 
materials in declared installations: the Agency had to have the means of detecting clandestine 
activities. 
29. Apart from non-proliferation, States with nuclear facilities had a special responsibility 
in the area of safety, and the French delegation welcomed the fact that the present session 
of the General Conference was the occasion for the signing of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety which had been the initiative of the European Union two years before. The fact that 
it had been possible to draw up the Convention so quickly had been due to the co-operation 
of all the countries concerned, which had addressed themselves to what was technically and 
in practical terms achievable on the basis of the safety principles recognized by the 
international community. The French delegation appealed to all States operating nuclear 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 17 

reactors to accede to the Convention as soon as possible and to implement it with the utmost 
promptness. Profiting from the momentum which had thereby been established, it had been 
decided to lay down comparable provisions for the safety of nuclear waste management. 
That was an important task which had to be undertaken with the fullest degree of 
transparency. In that respect, France was ready to submit its waste storage sites to inspection 
by missions organized by the Agency under its Waste Management Assessment and Technical 
Review Programme (WATRP). 

30. A considerable effort was still to be made before safety reached an equivalent level 
in all operational facilities and the co-operation of all countries was necessary in an area 
where there were countless difficulties. During the past year significant results had been 
recorded in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe due to action undertaken by the 
international community, and in particular the European Union, with the support of 
international banks and especially the EBRD. The most significant example was the effort 
made with Bulgaria and Lithuania to raise the level of nuclear safety and meet the energy 
demands of those countries. However, there were other situations that still gave cause for 
concern; that was particularly the case with the reactors which remained operational at the 
Chernobyl site and the closing down of which posed numerous and very difficult problems. 
The European Union and the G-7 had decided to make substantial financial assistance 
available in an attempt to solve those difficulties, and it was to be hoped that that goal would 
be rapidly achieved. 
31. France had always accorded great importance to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities, although it was not always easy to measure their impact. The activities which had 
been undertaken in that area over the years had been very beneficial, and tribute should be 
paid to the Director General for his initiative in organizing a seminar during which the 
Agency's objectives and methods had been studied with a view to improving their 
effectiveness. 
32. Management of the back end of the nuclear fuel cycle was a special responsibility for 
all States operating nuclear facilities. For its part, France had decided to reprocess irradiated 
fuel in order to extract the plutonium and re-use it in reactors, the waste being separated and 
handled in the manner best suited to each category of material. Active research was under 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 18 

way to ensure ongoing improvements in the techniques used, and that policy enabled energy 
sources to be managed in the most effective possible way while ensuring the greatest degree 
of protection for workers, the population and the environment. The plutonium produced was 
subject to very strict regulations in terms of radiation protection, accountability or physical 
protection, and did not present any unsurmountable hazards. It was the responsibility of all 
States operating nuclear installations to comply with the entire range of those regulations and 
to ensure that they were applied, but it was the duty of all who had contributed to their 
drafting to ensure that, wherever they were applied, the rules and regulations were 
satisfactory. 

33. Public opinion should certainly be informed of the quantities that were involved and 
there should be greater transparency, but it was important for Governments to try to prevent 
the development of campaigns founded on erroneous information and exploiting people's 
fears. In fact, there were genuine questions that arose regarding three categories of fissile 
materials: those located in countries which had not acceded to the NPT and which were not 
subject to inspection by the Agency, excess materials produced by the dismantling of 
weapons in the United States and Russia, and the plutonium contained in non-reprocessed 
irradiated fuels. Those were problems which the international community would have to 
solve with the assistance of the nuclear industry, but they would not be settled by placing the 
blame on reprocessing technology or by fosteiing reflexes of an emotional nature among the 
public. 
34. Giving an account of events that had taken place in France during the past year, he 
said that France had 54 nuclear reactors, which represented a net 57 GW(e). The French 
nuclear programme was continuing with the construction of the first stage of the N4 series, 
comprising four units of 1450 MW(e). The first unit was due to be connected to the grid in 
1995, and the last in 1998. Electricity production from nuclear sources had been 350 TW-h 
in 1993, 8.8% more than in 1992. It had represented almost 78% of the country's entire 
generation of electricity. Exports to neighbouring countries had risen to 61 TW-h, nearly 
14% of total production. The proportion of power stations operating with pressurized water 
reactors had been much higher than in 1992: 80% as against 71%. Furthermore, the 
Superphenix fast reactor, which would be devoted to research and demonstration purposes, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 19 

had been started up again. A programme had been launched to gain experience of the 
operation of fast reactors on an industrial scale, to demonstrate their suitability for working 
as consumers of plutonium and to contribute to the research programme on the possibilities 
of long-term radioactive waste elimination. Superphenix had gone critical on 4 August 1994, 
and its power build-up would proceed stepwise. 

35. As for the fuel cycle, the most noteworthy event had been the completion of the 
Melox plant for the manufacture of MOX fuel, which was the largest such plant in the world. 
In 1993, five pressurized water reactors had been using MOX fuel, and that number would 
rise to seven in 1994. Later, MOX fuel would be used in sixteen 900 MW(e) pressurized 
water reactors. By then as much plutonium would be consumed in those 16 units, one third 
of whose fuel would be MOX, as they produced. In the reprocessing area, the UP3 plant 
at La Hague had been operating satisfactorily since it went into service in 1990. In 
May 1994, COGEMA had received authorization to open new shops to raise the capacity of 
UP2 to 800 tonnes of heavy metal per year. Since 1976 the La Hague plant had reprocessed 
more than 5000 tonnes of fuel from light-water reactors. 
36. Regarding the management of long-term waste and highly radioactive waste, a 
mediator had been given the task of agreeing with local authorities on the sites where 
laboratories might be located. Four French Departments had been designated for preliminary 
work, after which the sites themselves would be selected. On its side, the national 
radioactive waste management agency had, in accordance with legal requirements, compiled 
an inventory of wastes. Apart from an improvement in waste management, France was also 
expecting increased opportunities for dialogue with the public and was hoping to be followed 
along that road by other countries. 
37. In areas that were essential for the safety of the world, such as nuclear 
non-proliferation and nuclear safety, the future was burgeoning both with hopes and with 
challenges. The French delegation was in no doubt that, with its customary competence and 
with the support of the international community, the Agency would be able to fulfil the 
former and to take up the latter. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 20 

38. Mr. MIKHAILOV (Russian Federation) said his country valued greatly the 
Agency's pivotal role in the planning and development of international co-operation in the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, the strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, and 
nuclear power plant safety. The Agency's involvement in major global challenges such as 
nuclear arms reduction, meeting mankind's energy requirements and environmental protection 
was evidence of its effectiveness and drive. Russia appreciated in particular the Agency's 
constructive role in maintaining the effectiveness of the NPT. It was thus fully prepared to 
co-operate in improving the safeguards system and called for universal accession to the NPT 
and its indefinite extension. In that regard, it attached great importance to the forthcoming 
1995 Review Conference. 
39. Dynamic and complex, the end of the twentieth century embraced the collapse of old 
ideas and the appearance of fresh hopes, stimulated in particular by the massive reduction 
in the nuclear arsenals of Russia and the United States undertaken at the end of the Cold 
War. Under the terms of the START II Treaty the two countries had agreed to reduce the 
number of their nuclear warheads by 70%. Russia was aiming to reduce its stock of nuclear 
weapons in order to achieve not only the objectives set by the START II Treaty but also 
those announced in unilateral declarations made by its leaders. On 23 June 1994, again with 
the United States, Russia had concluded an agreement to shut down reactors producing 
plutonium and abandon the use thereof for military purposes, complementing the agreement 
of 17 June 1992 on the transfer, storage and elimination of nuclear weapons, the prevention 
of their proliferation and the control and accounting of nuclear materials. Co-operation 
agreements on the safe elimination of nuclear weapons and peaceful utilization of the 
resulting materials had been signed with France, the United Kingdom, Germany, Italy and 
Japan. Agreements with Ukraine, Belarus and Kazakhstan providing for the elimination by 
the Russian Ministry of Atomic Energy, on Russian territory, of the nuclear weapons located 
in the Republics of the former Soviet Union had been concluded or were in preparation. 
40. The cost of nuclear disarmament was extremely high - around $100 000 to dismantle 
a single nuclear warhead - but despite its economic problems Russia was spending almost a 
million million roubles every year on the operations in question. The large volume of 
investments required nevertheless delayed the process, which could be expedited if an 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 21 

international fund to finance operations to eliminate nuclear weapons was established. In that 
connection, Russia wished to express its gratitude for the international assistance it had 
received for the elimination of its nuclear weapons, a problem which affected the entire 
planet. As a proponent of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and technology, Russia 
was collaborating, mainly with the United States, in order to ensure that the ongoing nuclear 
disarmament process was fully transparent and irrevocable. It was also confident that a 
comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty could be open for signature in 1995. Since 
October 1990 Russia had observed a moratorium on nuclear explosions. 

41. Turning to the illicit trafficking in nuclear material, which had been a source of 
anxiety to the international community for some time, he said that the accusations made in 
the press against Russia and its Ministry of Atomic Energy appeared to be unjustified. 
Troublemakers were at work, and he felt that not only the producers and the sellers but also 
the buyers should be punished, for it was they who initiated the process. A body should be 
established with special responsibility for finding out who was transporting the materials in 
question and under what conditions, and who the buyers were. The matter raised many 
questions requiring the intervention of international organizations. For its part, Russia had 
initiated bilateral co-operation with Germany with a view to stopping illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials. All the nuclear powers should endeavour to improve their systems for 
accounting, control and physical protection of their military nuclear materials so that effective 
steps could be taken against trafficking therein. Russia was in favour of drafting 
international guidelines on technical customs control procedures and of establishing 
organizations with special responsibility for determining the sources of the trafficking and 
authorized to mark nuclear material extracted from weapons, in accordance with Agency 
recommendations. Russia was prepared to use such a marking system since it desired that 
the identity of the country of origin should appear on nuclear materials as a matter of routine. 
The Agency could play an essential role in combating illicit trafficking, mainly by 
co-ordinating the implementation of measures to strengthen physical protection, by helping 
countries enhance their nuclear materials accounting and control systems, and by training 
staff. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 22 

42. Concerning the control of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, to which his country 
had always attached the greatest importance, he welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to enhance 
the effectiveness and economic viability of the safeguards system on the basis of 
recommendations made by SAGSI, some of which were ready to be implemented 
immediately. For example, the Agency could increase its co-operation with national systems 
of accounting and control, using as a basis the partnership agreement established with the 
Member States of EURATOM. Neither was there any need to postpone further the 
implementation of measures for administrative modernization and streamlining proposed by 
the Secretariat in Programme 93+2. Russia's technical support programme for safeguards 
included some 15 projects involving destructive and non-destructive analysis of nuclear 
materials. It regularly organized courses for Agency inspectors, and also courses on national 
systems of accounting and control of nuclear materials. Over the past year, it had allocated 
510 million roubles in support of the Agency's safeguards, and it planned to make a larger 
contribution in the future. Lastly, his delegation welcomed the Secretariat's efforts to apply 
Agency safeguards in the Middle East. It was to be hoped that all the countries of the region 
would accept international monitoring of all their nuclear activities and the establishment of 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 
43. Turning to international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, he 
expressed satisfaction with the Agency's work in 1993, and in particular with the constructive 
proposals put forward for resolving problems of energy and ecology worldwide. Russia, 
which was celebrating the fortieth anniversary of its first nuclear power plant, was 
collaborating closely with the Agency on matters relating to nuclear power. Nuclear plants 
accounted for 12% of the electricity generated on Russian territory as a whole, 30% in the 
area from the Urals to St. Petersburg and almost 45 % in the North-west. Nuclear power had 
become essential to mankind's sustainable development and was sure to undergo rapid 
expansion in the twenty-first century. The only problems involved were those relating to 
scale, pace of expansion, economic viability, nuclear power plant safety, waste storage and 
environmental protection. The plans for the new generation of power plants attempted to 
solve those problems. They provided for inherently safe systems that eliminated the 
possibility of an uncontrolled chain reaction and a closed fuel cycle that included a safe waste 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 23 

disposal system. Thermal or fast reactors operating on MOX fuel were examples of what 
was foreseen. Close international co-operation, including the world market, and reciprocal 
support for national programmes were necessary if mankind was to extract the maximum 
benefit from nuclear power. Scientific and commercial co-operation should be unrestricted 
and, as a forum for those who favoured the promotion of nuclear power, the Agency had an 
important role to play in that respect. 

44. For a number of years, high priority had been given to co-operation on enhancing the 
safety of nuclear power plants equipped with first-generation reactors. In that context Russia 
was fully co-operating with all quarters, and especially the Agency. It had managed to 
resolve most of the theoretical problems affecting its technical co-operation programmes in 
the nuclear power field, but regretted that such co-operation was progressing slowly. The 
most successful results had been obtained in the bilateral projects, the most useful of those 
being the specific measures designed for particular nuclear power plants and completing a 
pre-existing Russian programme. In devising a new generation of reactors the more 
advanced States would have to take into account the interests of the developing countries. 
In order to reduce the costs of plant design and construction, the nuclear industry needed to 
design reactor types lending themselves to standardized, serial production. Russia was 
willing to participate in international programmes on such activities and was looking forward 
to receiving suggestions. It was already co-operating on the design of reactors for the 
twenty-first century with companies from the United States. 
45. The Agency's programme and budget for 1995 assured the necessary funding for its 
priority activities, in particular the programmes that affected all countries. His delegation 
took a particular interest in the work planned with regard to nuclear power, the fuel cycle, 
nuclear safety, radiation protection, radioactive waste management, the International Nuclear 
Information System and nuclear constants. It commended the Secretariat on its contribution 
to preparing the Convention on Nuclear Safety, an instrument of major significance which 
would open the way to broad international co-operation. 
46. Russia, which had always attached great importance to the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities, noted with satisfaction that the volume of technical 
assistance for which the Agency had assured funding was increasing year by year, mainly 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 24 

because of the indicative planning figures set for the TACF, and believed that the principle 
of voluntary contributions made in national currency should be retained. Despite the 
economic problems the country was facing, the Russian Government had paid 3000 million 
roubles into the TACF for the purchase of equipment and to finance courses and training for 
specialists from developing countries. 

47. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon), expressing satisfaction at the Agency's efforts to 
promote peace and the well-being of mankind, noted with pleasure that safeguards were 
gaining ground and that more countries were accepting Agency inspections. In that respect, 
he welcomed the safeguards agreement concluded with Ukraine, which he hoped would soon 
enter into force, Cuba's decision, and the planned safeguards agreements with Belarus, 
St. Kitts and Nevis, and Dominica. He also welcomed South Africa's return to participation 
in the Agency as a country with a democratic government. 
48. The Agency's most important achievement during the past year had been the 
preparation and adoption of the International Convention on Nuclear Safety, which Lebanon 
intended to sign. The Convention would undoubtedly make a contribution to curbing the 
dangers that threatened mankind, and his delegation hoped that its scope would be extended 
to military nuclear facilities. It also acclaimed the Agency's efforts and the essential role it 
had played in the preparation of the Basic Safety Standards. 
49. The problem of the application of safeguards in the DPRK had long been causing the 
Agency concern and had been the subject of much debate. His delegation was pleased to 
note that the current negotiations between the DPRK and the United States, which Lebanon 
had encouraged from the start, were going well and he hoped that they would reach a 
successful conclusion, something which would facilitate the Agency's task and permit it to 
monitor the DPRK's nuclear activities more thoroughly. 
50. The Middle East was another area of the world that had occupied the Agency's 
attention. The peace negotiations were continuing, but what had been achieved so far would 
remain fragile unless tangible progress could be made on all fronts. The international 
community should realize that as long as Arab territories remained occupied by Israel, as 
long as international resolutions went unheeded and as long as a people was prevented from 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 25 

returning to the land from which it had been expelled, complete peace would not be 
achieved. Lebanon, an active Member of the Agency which fulfilled all its obligations, 
particularly those pertaining to safeguards, trusted that the day would come when all States 
in the region would follow its example by accepting Agency safeguards, signing the NPT and 
deciding in favour of a just, global and lasting peace based on respect for the land and the 
rights of others and leading to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Israel should 
understand that by continuing to occupy Lebanese territory and refusing to comply with 
international law and Security Council resolution 425, which called for its immediate and 
unconditional withdrawal from southern Lebanon and the western Bekaa, it was not helping 
the peace negotiations in any way and was hampering the Agency's efforts to establish a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 

51. A peace not accompanied by economic and social development and an improved 
standard of living was not a whole peace. That was where the Agency could play an 
additional role - its main role being inspections and the application of safeguards - by 
contributing effectively towards raising the standard of living, accelerating the development 
and improving the situation of populations with regard to health, nutrition and the 
environment. His delegation considered those to be the main objectives of technical cooperation 
projects. In that connection Lebanon, having co-operated fully with the Agency 
to help it achieve its goals and having ceased to receive technical assistance because of the 
war to which it had fallen victim, felt that it deserved some priority under the technical cooperation 
programme so as to be able to consolidate peace in the country, regain the ground 
lost in the nuclear field and re-establish its pioneering role in science and technology. That 
was what Lebanon hoped to achieve, aided by the Agency's technical co-operation managers. 
52. The Middle East suffered chronically from a shortage of drinking water and from 
problems of irrigation. The potential of nuclear technology for groundwater exploration and 
seawater desalination suggested that the Agency would have an effective role to play, in 
parallel with its contribution towards enhancing the quality and storage life of foodstuffs, 
protecting livestock resources and developing agricultural methods. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 26 

53. The 1995 NPT Review Conference would be a unique opportunity for all States to 
work to strengthen the NPT in order to make it permanent and truly universal. One of the 
greatest threats currently facing the international community was illicit trafficking in nuclear 
materials. The Agency should take appropriate measures in co-operation with national 
authorities in order to combat the phenomenon. 
54. In the light of the political changes which had occurred at regional and international 
levels during recent years, serious consideration should be given to introducing necessary 
changes to Article VI of the Statute, with a view to improving the balance of representation 
in the Board of Governors and adopting a classification of geographical areas appropriate to 
the new situation. 
55. Lastly, his delegation shared the anxieties of the Agency's administration with regard 
to the financial situation. It feared that the lack of resources would lead to a reduction in the 
technical assistance which the Agency furnished to developing countries. All possible steps 
should therefore be taken to endow the Agency with reliable and predictable resources, and 
Lebanon appreciated the Secretariat's efforts to that end. 
56. Mr. MEADWAY (United Kingdom), associating himself with the statements 
made by the delegate of Germany on behalf of the European Union and by the delegate of 
France, said that the future of nuclear power depended on the extent to which it could be 
competitive while complying with strict safety and environmental protection standards. In 
the United Kingdom, the Department of Trade and Industry was carrying out a study on the 
future of nuclear power, focusing on the economic and commercial viability of the country's 
new nuclear stations. The nuclear industry had been invited to make public its arguments 
in favour of expanding nuclear electricity generating capacity, and the strength of its case 
would be measured by its ability to attract private sector funding. 
57. The past year had been a very successful one for the United Kingdom's nuclear 
industry. Its first pressurized water reactor, Sizewell B, would commence commercial 
operation at the beginning of 1995. It was a high performance design, incorporating 
advanced safety features that would have high export potential. British Nuclear Fuel's 
thermal oxide reprocessing plant at Sellafield had received final approval in March. The 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 27 

Nuclear Electric and Scottish Nuclear companies, independent since 1990, had improved their 
performance very substantially and now supplied a quarter of the United Kingdom's energy 
needs. In addition, the unit cost of nuclear electricity generation had continued to fall. 

58. At international level, the central event was the 1995 NPT Review Conference. The 
Treaty had played an essential role in preventing nuclear proliferation while establishing a 
framework to encourage the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. The United Kingdom 
favoured the Treaty's indefinite and unconditional extension as the only option that 
demonstrated clearly the States Parties' commitment to supporting and maintaining the 
Treaty. An extension by one or several "fixed periods" would risk undermining confidence 
in the NPT. Indefinite extension was the best means of maintaining the current level of 
nuclear security, on which continued growth in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology 
depended. 
59. Maintaining the credibility of the Agency's safeguards was essential in order to 
guarantee full implementation of the NPT, as the recent case of the DPRK had shown. The 
United Kingdom was deeply concerned by the DPRK's persistent failure to comply fully with 
the safeguards agreement it had concluded with the Agency. His country welcomed the 
agreement reached between the DPRK and the United States on 30 August, and hoped that 
the forthcoming talks would lead to a successful outcome. The United Kingdom, together 
with its partners in the European Union and NATO, had continued to reiterate to the Agency 
and the United Nations the importance it attached to the DPRK's abiding by its NPT and 
safeguards obligations. Without the DPRK's full co-operation the Agency could no longer 
guarantee that that country was not manufacturing nuclear weapons. It was important to 
reaffirm the Agency's right to carry out the inspections it considered necessary at all the 
DPRK's nuclear sites (including special inspections at undeclared sites). 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 28 

60. His delegation endorsed the measures taken by the Director General and the Board 
of Governors to strengthen the Agency's safeguards system and looked forward to 
considering the integrated set of proposals that would be submitted in March 1995. 
Important measures were contemplated, and the United Kingdom welcomed the emphasis that 
was being placed on methods for the detection of undeclared activities which contravened 
non-proliferation undertakings, and the intention to introduce a new system of cost analysis. 
His delegation was concerned that, for the first time, the budget estimates for 1996 did not 
cover all the inspection requirements anticipated under existing or envisaged safeguards 
agreements. It was true, however, that it was difficult to produce cost estimates without a 
more precise definition of the safeguards strengthening measures and an accurate evaluation 
of the productivity gains that could be achieved. 
61. The United Kingdom shared the general anxiety over recent seizures of smuggled 
fissile material and endorsed the initiative of the German Government which, as the 
government holding the Presidency of the European Union, had submitted a draft resolution 
on the subject to the General Conference. The immediate need was to define the real extent 
of the problem. The Agency was well placed to do that, and should continue to assist the 
countries concerned to improve their systems of accounting and control of nuclear materials. 
62. Although safeguards were a major priority, the Agency's promotional activities were 
also very important, as was clearly demonstrated by the preparation of the International 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. His Government fully supported the Convention, which it 
would sign during the present session of the Conference. He hoped that it would enter into 
force at an early date so that the consensus which had developed during the negotiations 
would prevail during the implementation of the Convention. 
63. Turning to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities, he recalled 
that they had been spreading the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy for many 
years past, especially outside the power sector. Those activities remained most useful, and 
the United Kingdom appreciated the manner in which the Secretariat had reviewed and 
improved their functioning in order to ensure that the recipient States derived maximum 
benefit. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.2 
page 29 

64. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his Government's full commitment to and support for 
the Agency's objectives and principal activities. The General Conference was meeting at a 
time when it was necessary to grapple with the consequences of major changes that had taken 
place in the global political and economical context. It was more than ever necessary to 
concentrate on ensuring that the Agency was able to carry out its essential roles. The United 
Kingdom was ready to contribute fully to the fulfilment of that important task. 
The meeting rose at 5.10 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
12 December 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original:

 ENGLISH 
GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
, A . _ 12 December 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THIRD PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 20 September 1994, at 10.10 a.m. 
President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 
6 Arrangements for the Conference 1-4 

(a) 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items 
for initial discussion 1-3 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening date of 
the next session 
4 

Request for the restoration of voting rights 
5-8 

Question of participation by the Democratic People's 
Republic of Korea 9 - 10 
8 General debate and annual report for 1993 
(resumed) 11 - 151 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Islamic Republic of Iran 11 - 27 
Mauritius 28-31 
Republic of Korea 32 - 45 
Czech Republic 46 - 56 
Hungary 57 - 68 

[*] GC(XXXVIII)/1, Add.l and 2. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 l/Rev.2. 

94-03785 (IX) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 


page 2 

Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 

ABACC 
AFRA 


AGNES 
ARCAL 


ASSET 
Basic Safety 
Standards 

DPRK 
ELISA 
EURATOM 
FAO 
G-7 
GNP 
ICTP 
London Convention 

NEA 
NPT 
OSART 
Paris Convention 
PHARE 
Quadripartite 
Agreement 

RADWASS 
RAPAT 
RCA 

RIA 
TACF 
TACIS 
Tlatelolco Treaty 
UNSCOM 
USSR 
Vienna Convention 
WAMAP 
WWER 

Paragraphs 

Mexico 69 - 86 
Pakistan 87 - 103 
Tunisia 104- 110 
Sweden 111 122 
Armenia 123 - 133 
European Commission 134- 151 
Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Advanced General and New Evaluation of Safety 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 
Technology in Latin America 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 

International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for 
the Safety of Radiation Sources 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Group of Seven 
Gross national product 
International Centre for Theoretical Physics (in Trieste) 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of Wastes and Other 
Matter (1972) 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy (July 1960) 
Poland, Hungary: assistance for economic reconstruction 

Agreement between the Republic of Argentina, the Federative Republic of Brazil, the 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the 
International Atomic Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training Related to 
Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Radioimmunoassay 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Technical Assistance for the Commonwealth of Independent States 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the Caribbean 
United Nations Special Commission 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1961) 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 3 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CO1 

(a) ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION (GC(XXXVIII)/l, Add.l and 2) 
1. The PRESIDENT reported that the General Committee recommended to the 

General Conference that the agenda for the present session should include all the items listed 
in document GC(XXXVIII)/l, except item 2 (Applications for membership of the Agency) 
as no applications for membership had been submitted, together with supplementary items A 
(Restoration of technical assistance to Israel), requested by Israel, B (South Africa's position 
in the IAEA and the Board of Governors), requested by South Africa, and C (Designation 
of members of the Board of Governors), requested by the Philippines, contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/l/Add.1, and the additional item (Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear 
material), proposed by Germany on behalf of the European Union, contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/1/Add.2. The Committee further recommended that the Conference waive 
the time limit of seven days prescribed for additional items in Rule 15 of the General 
Conference's Rules of Procedure and consider the item on illicit trafficking during the 
present session. 

2. With respect to the allocation of items for initial discussion, the Committee 
recommended that the items listed in the provisional agenda and the supplementary list be 
taken up for discussion as indicated in documents GC(XXXVIII)/1 and Add.l. The 
Committee's recommendation with the regard to the allocation of the item entitled 
"Designation of members of the Board of Governors" had been taken by a vote. With regard 
to the additional item entitled "Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear material", 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/l/Add.2, the Committee had decided after a vote to 
recommend that it be discussed initially in the Committee of the Whole. 
3. As to the order of items, the Committee recommended that the order appearing in 
document GC(XXXVIII)/l be retained and that supplementary item A (Restoration of 
technical assistance to Israel) should be inserted between items 28 and 29 of the provisional 
agenda; that supplementary item B (South Africa's position in the IAEA and the Board of 
Governors) be taken up immediately after item 24; and that supplementary item C (Designation 
of members of the Board of Governors) be inserted between items 21 and 22. With 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 

page 4 

regard to the additional item (Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear material), the 
Committee recommended that it be taken up immediately after item 22 of the provisional 
agenda. All items would be renumbered accordingly. It was understood that after due notice 
and depending on progress of work some changes to the order might be necessary. 

The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 

(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT 
SESSION 
4. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had recommended to the 
General Conference that Friday, 23 September 1994 be set as the closing date of the 
thirty-eighth regular session and Monday, 18 September 1995 as the opening date of the 
thirty-ninth regular session of the General Conference, which would be held in Vienna. 
The General Committee's recommendations were adopted. 

REQUEST FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(XXXVIII)/INF/7) 

5. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had received a request from 
Iraq that the last sentence of Article XIX. A of the Statute be invoked in order that it might 
be permitted to vote during the present session of the General Conference. The General 
Committee recommended that the General Conference reject that request. 
6. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) pointed out that document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/7 
explained that the unjust embargo imposed on Iraq not only prevented it from having the 
necessary financial liquidity to fulfil its obligations to the Agency, but also meant that it was 
unable to provide food, medicine and other basic requirements for its population. Iraq had 
requested that its assets be released and financial transactions allowed, but had met with a 
negative response. The General Committee had in the past discussed similar problems of 
force majeure and had allowed a number of countries to enjoy their basic right to vote. 
When the matter had been brought up the previous year it had been dealt with in a political 
fashion and not in accordance with the provisions of Article XIX of the Statute. He called 
on the Conference to deal with the matter in a spirit of justice and fairness and not to respond 
to political pressures. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 5 

7. The PRESIDENT said that each request for restoration of voting rights was 
examined on its own merits. He took it that the Conference accepted the General 
Committee's recommendation. 
8. The General Committee's recommendation was adopted. 
QUESTION OF PARTICIPATION BY THE DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF 
KOREA 

9. The PRESIDENT said that the Committee also recommended that, in 
accordance with Rule 30 of the General Conference's Rules of Procedure, the Conference 
permit the representative of the DPRK to participate in the discussion of the item relating to 
the implementation of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK, being a matter of direct 
concern to that country, should he so wish. 
10. The General Committee's recommendation was adopted. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(resumed) 

11. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) noted that the end of the Cold 
War had done nothing to remedy the deprivations of developing countries or to eliminate the 
conflicts in sensitive regions and potential hotbeds of global crises. Increased military 
presence and deployment of foreign forces, the stock-piling of weapons, the strengthening 
of military alliances and increasing growth in military spending, particularly in the sensitive 
region of the Middle East and the Persian Gulf, all contrived to make it virtually impossible 
to achieve peace and security. The present-day realities were as frightening as the apparent 
Cold War confrontations. There was particular reason to be dismayed when comparing the 
unprecedented mobilization of certain States in the case of Kuwait's occupation with the 
actions of those same States in the case of the tragic crisis in Bosnia and Herzegovina. 
12. In order to achieve peace and security, all States should work to eradicate prevailing 
prejudices and injustices and to create balance and equity within the global disarmament 
process. If the endeavours of Agency Member States in the General Conference could, 
directly or indirectly, lead to global disarmament and the promotion of the peaceful 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 6 


applications of nuclear energy in a just manner, there would be renewed hope of establishing 
a more secure world. 

13. The main prerequisite for the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons was the effective 
implementation of measures to halt the vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons in countries 
possessing such weapons. Effective measures should therefore be taken at the 
NPT Extension Conference to halt the vertical proliferation of nuclear weapons and to 
dismantle the existing arsenals within a specified time. The NPT Extension Conference 
should also clearly indicate the obligations of the nuclear-weapon States in that respect. The 
Treaty's objectives would be jeopardized if the Treaty were extended indefinitely without 
specifying time limits or the scope of responsibilities and means of verification. 
14. The success of past NPT Review Conferences had been hampered by the nonfulfilment 
on the part of nuclear-weapon States of their Treaty obligations. Those countries 
had not taken any major steps within the past five years in the area of nuclear disarmament, 
had not refrained from exporting nuclear-weapons-related materials and equipment to other 
countries, and had not provided positive and active technical co-operation in the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy with non-nuclear-weapon States. 
15. The Agency's safeguards system, based on the existing agreements between the 
Agency and Member States, and the Agency's record in implementing safeguards agreements 
had been successful. The exceptional instances of violation, as in the case of Iraq, should 
not serve as an excuse for the nuclear-weapon States, particularly the United States, to 
undermine the Agency's statutory tasks and obligations or to exert pressure to perform 
unconventional inspections and interfere irresponsibly with and violate the sovereign rights 
of other countries under the pretext of strengthening safeguards. In order to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguard system, it was necessary to respect the Agency's mandate and 
jurisdiction, to refrain from indulging in discrimination and applying double standards, and 
to maintain a strong stand against the unilateral actions of certain nuclear-weapon States. 
16. In that context, the efforts taking place at international level to divert the issue of the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons to the United Nations Security Council were not only in 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 7 

sharp contrast with the mandate foreseen for the Security Council in the Charter of the 
United Nations, but could also undermine the effective implementation of Agency safeguards. 

17. The Agency, under the pressure of influential powers, had so far not been able to 
provide a balance between its duty to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and its 
duty to promote the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Most parties to the NPT, 
particularly those which acted more independently, had been deprived of easy access to 
nuclear material and technology for peaceful purposes. During the preparation of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, the industrialized countries had opposed the inclusion of 
phrases in the draft that would have facilitated the exchange of the required technical knowhow 
needed by Member States to ensure the safety of their nuclear power plants. 
Furthermore, the unilateral actions of certain nuclear-weapon States in preventing the transfer 
of so-called dual-purpose materials and technology, based on arbitrary interpretations, was 
unacceptable. Such transfers should be devoid of any political aims and objectives and 
should be negotiated at international level, within the framework of a legitimate and 
transparent process. 
18. The Islamic Republic of Iran had been one of the victims of such gross injustices and, 
although its nuclear activities had always been approved by the Agency, it had been subjected 
to strong pressure from the United States and certain other Western countries. Countries 
such as the United States apparently did not recognize the right of the people of the Third 
World to enjoy the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
19. Concerns associated with infringement of national sovereignty as a result of political 
pressure and the consequent increased difficulty of benefiting from the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy had led some developing countries to cease their co-operation with the 
Agency and even to renounce the NPT. If the objectives of the developing countries in 
joining international treaties on nuclear weapons and technology were not met, such countries 
could not be expected to comply with the provisions of such treaties. 
20. The application of selective and discriminatory standards in the sensitive area of the 
Middle East, such as the United States' unequivocal support of Israel's nuclear activities and 
increasing pressure on other countries of the region, under the pretext of promoting a 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 8 

nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, undermined the NPT's credibility and 
hampered security-building measures in the region. There could be no peace in the Middle 
East while Israel continued to reject the proposed nuclear-weapon-free zone and continued 
to renounce the NPT. By rejecting the NPT and by developing nuclear weapons with the 
tacit approval of the United States, Israel had become not only a serious threat to the region, 
but also to peace and security in the whole world. 

21. His country had initiated the nuclear-weapon-free zone plan for the Middle East and 
had repeatedly emphasized that it should be established in a fair and comprehensive manner. 
The regional objectives would never be fulfilled and countries in the region would not be 
encouraged to co-operate, so long as unilateral and discriminatory pressure was applied and 
Israel's threatening stance continued to be supported by the United States and overlooked by 
certain countries in the West. 
22. Turning to the subject of nuclear safety, he welcomed the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety, although it was limited to nuclear power plants, which constituted only a small 
portion of the fuel cycle. His country believed that a similar convention should be prepared 
covering all applications of nuclear energy. Although it was common knowledge that nuclear 
installations with military applications presented more serious dangers than peaceful facilities, 
international organizations, such as the Agency, had no information or control over such 
facilities. International conventions to control the safe operation of such facilities should 
therefore be drawn up at the earliest opportunity. A convention on the management and safe 
storage of nuclear waste should also be drafted and signed by Member States as soon as 
possible. 
23. The programmes of Iran's Atomic Energy Organization covered the utilization of 
nuclear energy for generating part of the country's electrical energy requirements; the 
acquisition of technology for the design and manufacture of reactors; the training of the 
necessary specialists and the transfer of technical know-how; the provision of nuclear 
services in the fields of industry, agriculture and medicine; the protection of the environment 
and the population against the dangers of radiation; and the provision of the raw materials 
required for Iran's fuel cycle. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 9 

24. In order to achieve those objectives, a number of activities were being undertaken 
including co-ordination of contractual work related to the construction of the Esteghlal 
nuclear power plant in Bushehr with the co-operation of the People's Republic of China and 
completion of unit 1 of the Bushehr nuclear power plant by the Russian Federation; 
installation of a zero-power research reactor and a training reactor; completion of the existing 
radioisotope laboratories and installation of a cyclotron accelerator for the production of 
industrial, medical and research isotopes; production of various types of lasers; expansion 
of the capacity of the existing gamma irradiation centre and establishment of food irradiation 
centres in other regions of Iran; expansion of dosimetry and thermoluminescence services; 
establishment of a pilot plant for the production of fuel and nuclear material; and training 
of personnel in the field of nuclear science and technology. 
25. As his country had a large, suitable infrastructure for peaceful nuclear applications, 
it was prepared to host trainees and experts taking part in specialized courses organized by 
the Agency. It had also suggested that the Agency organize regional training courses, 
seminars and meetings and conduct regional joint projects using the facilities of Iran's Atomic 
Energy Organization. 
26. His delegation commended the Department of Technical Co-operation on its efforts 
to facilitate the transfer of nuclear technology to Member States within the framework of 
model projects. That was a positive step in the right direction. However, if a model project 
was successful in one Member State and another Member State had the required facilities to 
receive the technical assistance involved, the Agency should also implement the same model 
project in that State. Furthermore, a country with financial resources should not be placed 
at a disadvantage when the allocation of technical assistance was being reviewed and 
assessed. He noted with regret that implementation of the technical co-operation programme 
had been disrupted by the failure of some Member States, particularly those with extensive 
financial means, to pay their share of the target for voluntary contributions. 
27. Amendment of the Agency's Statute was one of the subjects which had been discussed 
for many years and, with the Agency's increased membership resulting from the 
disintegration of the former Soviet Union and the establishment of new republics, such an 
amendment had become even more necessary than before. The number of members of the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 10 

Board of Governors should increase in line with the Agency's increased membership. 
Furthermore, the structure of permanent and elected membership of the Board should become 
more logical. A further review of the development of nuclear industries for peaceful 
purposes in Member States should be carried out so that the permanent seats on the Board 
of Governors could be fairly distributed among the countries which had more advanced 
nuclear industries. 

28. Mr. UTCHANAH (Mauritius), having welcomed South Africa's return to the 
General Conference after a long absence, said that the Agency's two-pronged role could be 
perceived as the promotion of the use of nuclear energy and verification of its peaceful use. 
With the ever-increasing number of applications of atomic energy and number of nuclear 
installations that had to be safeguarded, the Agency's task was becoming increasingly 
complex and arduous. 
29. There were at present a number of areas of concern to his delegation, such as the 
cases of nuclear trafficking that had been detected, the conclusion of RAP AT and WAMAP 
missions that radiation protection and waste management infrastructures were weak in many 
countries, the problems arising from the disposal by certain industrialized countries of 
nuclear waste in developing countries and from the disposal of nuclear waste at sea, and the 
problems associated with technically defective nuclear power plants that were known to have 
endangered the lives of hundreds of people. 
30. On the other hand, he noted with satisfaction the importance attached by the Agency 
to the transfer of nuclear technology. In providing that technology, it was essential to ensure 
that the technology was in line with the development norms of the recipient country and that 
proper training and guidance were provided. Applications of nuclear techniques in areas 
such as food processing and storage, animal production and medicine were of great 
importance to many developing countries in general and the isotope hydrology methods 
developed by the Agency could be of immense value to many sub-Saharan African countries 
where economic development was dependent on adequate water supplies. 
31. Mauritius, for its part, was already benefiting from Agency assistance in the fields 
of water resources development, agriculture and medicine. It was, however, proceeding 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 11 

cautiously by making sure that the use of nuclear technology was appropriate and that it had 
properly trained manpower. 

32. Mr. KIM (Republic of Korea) said that although the threat of global nuclear 
war had diminished in the light of the dramatic changes of recent years, the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime still faced serious challenges, such as non-compliance and the illicit 
trafficking of nuclear materials. Moreover, the Governments of many countries were finding 
it increasingly difficult to cope with the growing public resistance to nuclear power and 
radioactive waste management. Such developments called for the Agency to reassess and 
strengthen its roles and responsibilities. 
33. With regard to recent press reports on the illicit trafficking of nuclear materials, he 
welcomed the European Union's initiative in raising the issue and reiterated his delegation's 
concern that the Agency should take a more active role in the storage and management 
worldwide of sensitive fissile materials. Individual national authorities should also strive 
harder to prevent the unauthorized circulation of nuclear material. An international system 
should be established under the auspices of the Agency in order to monitor such activities 
and help guarantee full nuclear transparency. His delegation was willing to participate 
actively in whatever measures the Conference might wish to recommend. 
34. With regard to the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, his Government supported the 
principle of extending the Treaty and would consult with the other parties concerned with a 
view to achieving that objective in a manner acceptable to the international community. His 
delegation also looked forward to the early conclusion of a comprehensive test ban treaty and 
agreements to cease the production of nuclear material for nuclear weapons, and called upon 
the Agency to explore means of further developing its role in those areas and in the 
management of the nuclear materials resulting from the dismantlement of nuclear arsenals. 
35. His Government strongly supported Programme 93+2, under which it had invited 
Agency experts to the Republic of Korea earlier in the year to carry out field testing of 
environmental monitoring techniques. 
36. Turning to safety-related matters, he welcomed the Secretariat's continued efforts to 
enhance nuclear safety at national and international level since the accidents at Three Mile 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 12 

Island and Chernobyl, and called for the further development of technical programmes such 
as OSART and ASSET. 

37. His Government intended to contribute fully to the implementation of the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety, which it believed would open a new era of international co-operation in 
the enhancement of safety at nuclear power plants, and had noted with great interest the 
Secretariat's recent efforts to prepare the guidelines for periodic safety reviews, which should 
further improve their safe operation. 
38. His delegation recognized that, despite the existence of proven technologies and 
practices, the issue of radioactive waste management remained a politically sensitive one, and 
considered that greater effort would be required at national and international level in order 
to change public perceptions. His Government was pleased to note that final agreement had 
almost been reached on the draft Safety Fundamentals and, recognizing the importance of the 
RADWASS programme, welcomed that fact the General Conference would have before it 
a draft resolution designed to enable the Agency to take further measures aimed at enhancing 
international co-operation on radioactive waste management. 
39. His country had recently become a signatory to the London Convention and, in line 
with the resolution adopted by the contracting parties of the Convention in November 1993, 
looked forward to the ending of the unlawful dumping of radioactive waste into the sea. The 
Secretariat should continue to make its expertise available to the Member States concerned. 
40. The Republic of Korea now generated over 40% of its total electricity from nuclear 
power plants, an achievement for which it was indebted to the various technical assistance 
programmes provided by the Agency and donor countries. His country was now ready to 
increase its contribution to the promotion of international co-operation in that area, and 
accordingly in 1995 planned to share its experience of safe reactor operation with countries 
of the Asia and Pacific region by hosting an IAEA regional workshop. It also intended to 
sponsor an interregional training course on nuclear power project management and to make 
a special contribution amounting to US $200 000 to the RCA programme. 
41. Significant geopolitical changes affecting nuclear development worldwide had 
occurred since the Agency's Statute had last been amended in 1973. His Government 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 13 

considered that thorough review and revision was urgently required in order to accommodate 
the changes and ensure the Agency's continuing relevance. In that regard, he urged Member 
States and the Secretariat to pursue without delay further consultations aimed at building a 
consensus on the revision of Article VI of the Statute. 

42. His Government was firmly committed to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to 
nuclear transparency. In that connection, a national Technology Centre for Nuclear Control 
had recently been established for the purpose, inter alia, of helping Agency inspectors 
implement their work more effectively and efficiently at his country's nuclear facilities. It 
was hoped that the Agency would provide technical help to train the personnel involved. 
43. His Government was also studying seriously the possibility of joining the Nuclear 
Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee in the near future. 
44. The DPRK's persistent non-compliance with its safeguards obligations remained a 
matter of great concern to the international community. While his delegation welcomed the 
positive signs emerging from the current bilateral talks between the United States and 
the DPRK, such negotiations could neither defer nor replace the DPRK's obligation to 
implement fully its safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
45. His Government was willing to take a leading role in assisting the DPRK to convert 
to light water reactors, provided full nuclear transparency was not in doubt. His Government 
appreciated and fully supported the Secretariat's continuing efforts to implement the Agency's 
safeguards agreement with the DPRK and the relevant resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference, the Board of Governors and the United Nations Security Council. His 
Government also considered that it would be appropriate to reconvene the inter-Korean talks 
on nuclear-related matters in parallel with the talks between the United States and the DPRK, 
with the objective of implementing the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the 
Korean Peninsula. 
46. Mr. HREHOR (Czech Republic), having endorsed the Agency's Annual Report 
for 1993, noted that the thirty-eighth regular session of the General Conference was of 
particular importance to all Member States because it was the last one before the 1995 NPT 
Extension Conference and because it was associated with the signing of the Convention on 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 14 

Nuclear Safety. In addition, for his country, it was the first milestone in its membership of 
the Agency. 

47. The Agency's role in the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons had been steadily 
increasing. The Agency had also gained considerable importance in the field of nuclear 
safety through international co-operation programmes and the implementation of 
internationally recognized measures. 
48. The NPT, which would celebrate its twenty-fifth anniversary in 1995, was one of the 
cornerstones of the international security system at both global and regional level. It was an 
essential tool, which was helping to preserve world peace and security. His country, 
therefore, strongly supported all activities leading to the extension of the existing Treaty. 
The Agency played a valuable role in verifying compliance with the Treaty through its 
safeguards system, which was an integral part of the whole nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
In that context, his country fully supported the Agency's efforts to fulfil its safeguards 
obligations in the DPRK and in Iraq. 
49. It also appreciated the Agency's close co-operation with other supporting mechanisms 
of the NPT, such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee, in which the 
Czech Republic had always played an active role. It was convinced that those mechanisms 
did not create any restrictions to the transfer of technologies for the peaceful utilization of 
nuclear energy for countries with honest intentions. 
50. His country was deeply convinced that the most promising way to increase the 
effectiveness and efficiency of safeguards was through closer co-operation between a State 
and the Agency on the basis of an integrated safeguards system combining all the elements 
of the existing system, together with the new supplementary measures that had been 
introduced and proposed during the last few years. It was following with interest the 
development of Programme 93+2 and appreciated the invitation by a number of Member 
States to carry out the necessary field tests within the framework of that Programme and 
reiterated his own country's willingness to participate in those tests. 
51. Turning to nuclear safety, he noted that the Dukovany nuclear power plant was 
entering its tenth year of commercial operation. Despite the plant's high efficiency and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 15 

operational safety, the operating organization was preparing an extensive safety upgrading 
programme and, upon request by the State Office for Nuclear Safety, a new safety analysis 
report, which would re-examine the plant's operational safety. The Czech Republic's second 
nuclear power plant, Temelin, which was under construction and belonged to the group of 
the most advanced WWER reactors, was also undergoing design changes with a view to 
improving its safety. 

52. The Czech Republic would be one of the first countries to sign the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety and considered that step as a contribution to the efforts to enhance nuclear 
safety worldwide through national measures and through international co-operation. It would 
thereby also enable the international community to examine objectively the safety level and 
overall safety culture at Czech nuclear facilities. 
53. The successful technical co-operation between the Czech Republic and the Agency had 
been very useful in improving the safety of Czech nuclear facilities. In that connection, he 
noted that the Agency's extrabudgetary programme focusing on the identification of safety 
problems connected with WWER reactors had also been very valuable. 
54. One of the key prerequisites of the defence-in-depth concept was the use of highquality 
materials for all the critical components. His country's experience showed that the 
use of non-destructive methods for the identification of defects in those materials required 
special skills, which had to be permanently maintained and verified. The planned Agency 
programme to compare different NDT laboratories in Central and Eastern Europe would 
provide a further significant contribution to the safety of WWER reactors. 
55. The Czech Republic had always attached great importance to the application of 
nuclear safety principles within its legal framework. Although the State's function and role 
in that area and the rights and duties of all nuclear energy users were defined in the existing 
Czech nuclear legal framework, a new Atomic Energy Act was being prepared. That Act 
would readdress all the principal areas of nuclear safety and the suggested legislative changes 
would correspond to internationally recognized recommendations and practices. In parallel, 
the competence of the State Office for Nuclear Safety was going to be expanded and it was 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 16 

expected that it would also include the area of radiation protection, which was currently 
covered by the Ministry of Health. 

56. One of the important steps in enhancing his country's credibility was its signing in 
June 1994 of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability and the Joint Protocol relating to the 
Application of the Vienna Convention and Paris Convention. The new nuclear legislation 
would confirm explicitly the widely recognized principles, such as channelling liability to the 
operator, the need for a nuclear liability insurance system and financial guarantees by the 
State for compensation for damage. 
57. Mr. PUNGOR (Hungary) said there was no doubt that since the last General 
Conference, nuclear issues had become increasingly prominent in political life worldwide. 
The Agency had done a great deal in the past year to ensure that nuclear energy was used 
for human welfare and to create greater assurances about the peaceful nature of its use. 
58. The NPT, concluded nearly 25 years ago, and the regime based upon it, had become 
not only a fundamental instrument for maintaining international security and stability, but had 
also served as a solid basis for peaceful nuclear co-operation among nations. His 
Government supported the unconditional and indefinite extension of the Treaty and appealed 
to all countries that had not done so to accede to the Treaty and conclude a full-scope 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
59. Hungary fully supported the safeguards system and the programme launched by the 
Secretariat to strengthen it. The objective was an efficient safeguards system capable of 
providing reliable assurances on the peaceful nature of nuclear activities, including detection 
of undeclared facilities. The challenging events of the recent past fully justified such 
aspirations. His country continued to offer its modest assistance in the elaboration and 
testing of Programme 93+2, which would, it was to be hoped, be adopted in 1995 by the 
Board of Governors. 
60. Hungary had consistently supported the Agency's activities in relation to full 
implementation of the Security Council resolutions on Iraq. It welcomed the report on the 
progress made in that area and the co-operation of the Iraqi authorities, which should 
continue through the long-term monitoring and verification process. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 17 

61. Despite several attempts made by the Agency, the problems relating to implementation 
of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK had not yet been fully solved. Hungary 
welcomed the latest positive developments and hoped that as a result of the negotiations 
between the DPRK and the United States, the Agency would soon be able to perform all the 
required activities with regard to nuclear facilities in the DPRK. 
62. Hungary shared the concern expressed by some delegations about recent cases of 
illegal transfer and smuggling of nuclear materials. That situation represented a serious 
challenge to the non-proliferation system and raised safety and environmental concerns as 
well. The Agency had an important role to play in facilitating international co-operation, 
including technical assistance to countries in fields not related to law enforcement. The 
Director General's recent initiative in that regard was to be commended, and the Hungarian 
authorities were ready to co-operate with the Agency to curb the problem of nuclear 
trafficking. 
63. The countries present at the General Conference had much in common: they all 
sought a peaceful world and a clean, healthy environment, and knew that nuclear energy 
could help them to achieve those goals. They were well aware, however, that if the world 
continued to rely on nuclear power and the many other applications of nuclear technology, 
it was essential for nuclear materials and facilities to be handled safely. National activities 
and international co-operation could help to achieve and maintain a high level of nuclear 
safety worldwide. One outstanding result of the joint efforts of Member States and the 
Agency had been the Convention on Nuclear Safety. His Government had signed the 
Convention and was convinced that it would greatly contribute to the enhancement of 
nuclear safety. Hungary would do its utmost to comply fully and hoped that a large number 
of States would sign and ratify the Convention soon. However, no Convention could relieve 
countries of their ultimate responsibility for nuclear safety within their borders. 
64. Considerable efforts had been made to solve problems relating to waste management 
in Hungary, to bring the regulatory system in line with international standards, and to 
improve nuclear safety. The Hungarian radioactive waste management project launched 18 
months previously, had to be carried out within a framework of appropriate regulations. His 
Government therefore looked forward to approval of the Safety Fundamentals and the other 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 18 

materials in the RADWASS programme and supported the proposal to develop a safety 
convention in the field of radioactive waste management. 

65. A new law on nuclear energy was under preparation in Hungary: the final revision 
of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage had been awaited so that 
domestic regulations could be adjusted accordingly. The country was updating its regulatory 
framework overall and finalizing the evaluation of safety at its nuclear power plant. The 
AGNES project to reassess the safety of the Paks nuclear power plant had been launched in 
late 1991. The conclusions demonstrated that the safety of the plant was acceptable and that, 
with further safety enhancement measures, its long-term reliable functioning could not be 
questioned. 
66. Hungary had benefited from the effective technical assistance provided through a 
number of projects under the Agency's technical assistance programme. A model project on 
strengthening training for operational safety at the Paks nuclear power plant had been 
developed and implementation was already well under way. The project aimed at 
restructuring the training system for the most important jobs at the plant, establishing a 
maintenance training system and enhancing the safety culture. The project was being 
supported by a number of organizations and countries, to which he expressed gratitude. 
67. His Government had decided to pledge a voluntary contribution corresponding to its 
share of the target for the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund for 1995. Training 
in various Hungarian institutions had been increased and a number of scientific visits had 
been hosted. 
68. In conclusion, his delegation congratulated the Secretariat on its excellent performance 
in spite of the financial and other constraints of the past year. The Agency had successfully 
worked to fulfil its main objectives of enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, 
health and prosperity and to ensure that it was not used for military purposes. It would enjoy 
Hungary's firm support in those endeavours in future. 
69. Mr. HELLER (Mexico) said that changes in the world political map had 
thrown up new challenges both regionally and globally putting nuclear non-proliferation at 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 19 

the top of the international agenda. The main advances made during the year in relation to 
non-proliferation needed to be evaluated in that context. 

70. The regime foreseen by the Tlatelolco Treaty was continuing to gain in strength and 
confirmed the merits of diplomacy in achieving objectives that some had previously dismissed 
as Utopian expressions of goodwill. As depositary of the Treaty, his Government welcomed 
the action taken by Argentina, Brazil and Chile in the first half of the year towards 
completing the legal procedures necessary to bring the Treaty fully into force. It also 
appreciated the decision of the Government of Cuba to accede to the Treaty as a full 
member. Latin America and the Caribbean would thus become the world's first densely 
populated nuclear-weapon-free zone. The entry into force of the Quadripartite Agreement 
and Protocol thereto concluded between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency would 
further bolster the Tlatelolco Treaty and other international non-proliferation regimes through 
its innovative, transparent and co-operative system of safeguards and reciprocal inspections, 
aimed at strengthening confidence with regard to non-proliferation and the development of 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
71. Regional denuclearization was also proceeding apace in Africa, where agreement had 
been reached in principle - if not on every detail - on the draft text of a treaty establishing 
a nuclear-weapon-free zone in that continent. In the Middle East, the substantial practical 
progress made in the peace negotiations over the past year could well contribute to creating 
an atmosphere conducive to the establishment in that region of a zone free of nuclear 
weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Security and confidence would be 
strengthened in that region through the application of safeguards, both by the Agency and 
through a special regional mechanism. 
72. Mexico earnestly hoped that the necessary conditions could be created for the speedy 
implementation of the Joint Declaration on the Denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula. 
Mexico welcomed the dialogue between the Governments directly concerned and hoped that 
it would yield a constructive solution ensuring the DPRK's renewed membership of the 
Agency and enabling it to fulfil its obligations under its safeguards agreement. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 20 

73. Mexico also welcomed the safeguards agreement concluded between Ukraine and the 
Agency, which represented a step towards its definitive accession to the NPT as a nonnuclear-
weapon State. 
74. The illicit trafficking of nuclear material presented a new challenge to 
non-proliferation efforts. It was incumbent upon the Agency's Member States at least to 
discuss the modalities of any contribution it might make towards eliminating that new hazard. 
75. The NPT Extension Conference due to be held in April 1995 would afford an 
outstanding opportunity to review the proper implementation of the agreements concluded 
over the past 25 years with respect to safeguards, horizontal and vertical non-proliferation 
and nuclear disarmament, as well as the development of peaceful nuclear applications and 
international co-operation. The success of that Conference was to be measured not only in 
terms of the decision adopted regarding its extension, but also in terms of the readiness 
shown by the States parties to evaluate its operation at a practical level and to get to grips 
with challenges confronting them in the world today. 
76. The peaceful applications of nuclear energy contributed to sustainable development 
through energy generation, food production and preservation, pest control and improved 
health care. It was particularly important to protect the inalienable right of States, in 
accordance with Articles HI and IV of the NPT, to develop such applications and to 
strengthen international co-operation, while establishing new mechanisms to strengthen the 
international safeguards regime and improve standards of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. 
77. With regard to Article VI of that Treaty, Mexico welcomed the progress made by the 
ad hoc committee on the negotiation of a comprehensive test ban treaty, which it hoped 
would be concluded and enter into force as soon as possible. It was essential that, in the 
meantime, all nuclear powers should extend their suspension of nuclear tests indefinitely. 
His delegation was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance provided to the 
Committee in evaluating the possible verification activities that the Agency might perform 
in connection with the Treaty. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 21 

78. In the course of the past year, his country had noted the advances made in 
strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of the Agency's safeguards system through 
Programme 93+2 and remained convinced that the success of that process was dependent 
on the taking of mandatory, universal and non-discriminatory measures, the establishing of 
a legal framework for defining their scope and the determining of their financial implications. 
A package of new safeguards measures incorporating all those elements needed to be put 
together in time for the 1995 NPT Extension Conference. As a demonstration of its full 
support for the international non-proliferation regime, his Government was willing to 
consider applying the proposed new safeguards measures and had accordingly entered into 
contact with the Agency to define the terms and scope of co-operation in that area. 
79. He hoped that all States would sign and ratify the Convention on Nuclear Safety as 
soon as possible in order to expedite its entry into force and the finalizing of arrangements 
on procedural and financial matters, national reports and the conducting of review meetings 
on the basis of the clarifications issued by the Diplomatic Conference in the annex to its Final 
Act. 
80. The Convention was not an end in itself for Mexico, which would, in December, be 
approving the Safety Fundamentals relating to radioactive waste and promoting the speedy 
negotiation of a convention on that subject. In that regard, it was his country's view that the 
international nuclear safety regime should extend to all high-risk nuclear installations, 
including military ones. With regard to radiation protection, his delegation welcomed the 
approval by consensus of the Basic Safety Standards, the drafting of which had involved 
experts from the Latin American region. 
81. Regarding the development of nuclear power in Mexico, loading of fresh fuel had 
recently been completed at the second unit of the Laguna Verde plant and the startup process 
had been commenced, thus bringing Mexico's total nuclear energy production capacity 
to 1300 MW and making it the region's top producer. Mexico was extremely grateful to the 
Agency for its assistance and collaboration in that endeavour. 
82. The Agency's technical assistance and co-operation activities in pursuit of its statutory 
objectives were a fundamental part of its raison d'etre. Its growing membership reflected 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 22 

the increasing interest throughout the world in the safe expansion of the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. A balance was therefore essential among the Agency's main activities, 
especially between its safeguards activities and those unrelated to safeguards. It was 
inconceivable, after all, that the regulatory side of the Agency's work should be strengthened 
without a concomitant strengthening of the promotional activities requiring regulation. It was 
matter of profound concern, therefore, that the resources pledged or paid to the TACF were 
in decline and that the appeals issued in various General Conference resolutions for assured 
and predictable funding for technical co-operation activities had met with little response. 
Mexico, for its part, would shortly be in a position to pay its traditional contribution to the 
TACF and to the Regular Budget. 

83. The current year marked the thirtieth anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division 
of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture, the great success of which was due to the 
excellent co-ordination achieved among the different bodies of the United Nations system for 
the benefit of the entire international community. In a similar connection, his delegation was 
appreciative of the regional co-operation that had led to an expanded use of nuclear 
techniques through the ARCAL, AFRA and RCA programmes. It hoped the Agency and the 
donor countries concerned would continue to provide crucial support for those programmes 
in view of their great importance for the sustainable development of the regions in question. 
84. In the light of the ever-increasing role played by the various peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy in Mexico's social and technological development, gratitude was due to the Secretariat 
for its assistance, especially in the areas of food irradiation, radioisotope production for 
industry and medicine, and environmental protection through electron beam purification of 
flue gases. He hoped that that assistance could be continued and that measures could be 
taken to promote the transfer of high-level technology to local industry in developing 
countries. 
85. From the point of view of building international confidence in non-proliferation, 
transparency was acquiring increasing importance as a guiding principle in all the 
multifarious aspects of the Agency's work and the Member States' activities. In the area of 
administration, the harmonization of financial documents and reorganization of the budget 
would lend the Agency's management processes greater transparency, while also facilitating 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 23 

evaluation of its activities and enabling it to make the most rational use of its scarce 
resources. 

86. The designation of members of the Board, a process of the utmost importance and 
complexity, was no exception to the transparency rule. In order to establish such 
transparency, it was necessary to follow the lines laid down in Article VI of the Statute and 
to establish clear and precise criteria for comparing the levels of nuclear development 
attained by different countries. Revision of Article VI was a prerequisite for strengthening 
the Agency and, to that end, the composition of its policy-making organs needed to be 
modified to reflect the new international situation, the Agency's increased membership and 
the political regrouping of countries and regions. That fundamental step would equip the 
organization to meet the demands of heterogeneous societies with diverse and changing 
interests, while at the same time enabling it to transmit technological advances more even 
handedly and safely by means of improved mechanisms for guaranteeing the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy. 
87. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan) noted that it was important for the General 
Conference to reaffirm its support for the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy 
because the remotest possibility of any negative impact of nuclear energy seemed to dominate 
the media and rivet the attention of the world. Even the Agency's own documents did not 
appear to be immune in that regard. The introduction to the Annual Report for 1993 began 
with a reference to strengthened and extended safeguards and controls, then to nuclear safety, 
with technical co-operation activities trailing in third place. For the majority of Member 
States, technology transfer through international co-operation remained the most important 
aspect of the Agency's mandate, indeed the Agency's raison d'etre. For its part, Pakistan 
was very grateful for the valuable technical co-operation that it had received through the 
Agency. 
88. The progress towards peace in the Middle East and the dawn of democracy in South 
Africa were welcome developments. On the other hand, the proliferation of conflicts in 
many parts of the world was cause for concern. The world community had to address those 
disputes and conflicts seriously since their resolution was often related to the realization of 
non-proliferation objectives, arms control and disarmament. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 24 

89. Pakistan had been proposing the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South Asia 
since 1972 and that proposal had been repeatedly endorsed by the United Nations General 
Assembly. The situation there had become even more critical owing to the emergence of 
ballistic missile capabilities. The deployment of ballistic missiles would create a tense 
security environment in South Asia, a situation which should be avoided at all costs. 
90. He therefore welcomed the negotiations on a comprehensive test ban treaty, which 
should help reduce the threat of vertical and horizontal proliferation, both globally and in 
South Asia, and looked forward to the conclusion of a convention on fissile materials. 
However, a comprehensive test ban treaty, a convention on fissile material and the extension 
of the NPT would not in themselves counter the danger of nuclear proliferation. Specific 
measures were required to address the real, rather than imagined, threats of proliferation in 
various regions of the world on an equitable and non-discriminatory basis. 
91. In that context, he noted the recently disclosed seizures of material, which reportedly 
contained traces of plutonium. As the Director General had confirmed, those incidents did 
not have proliferation significance, but they did involve radiation and health hazards. States 
possessing nuclear-weapons-usable material should give the utmost attention to its physical 
protection. It was unfortunate that the incidents in question had been sensationalized by the 
media, which had made irresponsible allegations. Behaviour of that kind undermined 
international co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
92. Energy, and in particular electricity, held the key to productivity and prosperity. The 
developing countries, where 75 % of the world's population was concentrated, used only 30% 
of the primary energy and 25% of the electricity produced in the world. That glaring 
disparity was reflected in living standards. Energy input was needed to increase productivity; 
the resulting prosperity fuelled further demand for energy. While overall energy use had 
kept pace with the growth of GNP, the demand for electricity had increased much faster in 
developing countries. The energy requirements of energy-deficient countries such as those 
in the Asia and Pacific region doubled every seven years. The only significant non-fossilfuel 
energy resources were hydroelectric and nuclear power, which together contributed more 
than one third of the world's electricity output. However, hydroelectric power was seriously 
limited by geographical considerations and was also beset with settlement and displacement 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 25 

problems. Nuclear power plants, on the other hand, could be located near load centres 
thereby avoiding the costs and inconvenience of long-distance transmission. As the Director 
General had pointed out, 1994 marked the 50th anniversary of the start of nuclear electricity 
generation. It was time both to look back and ahead. If nuclear power did not meet the 
increasing electricity demand in Asia and the Pacific, fossil fuels would fill the gap thus 
adding to the greenhouse effect. Unfortunately, over the past decade only a few new 
countries had joined those already operating nuclear power plants. In many countries, there 
was great potential for introducing nuclear electricity into the grid, but there were practical 
difficulties which should be addressed by the Agency. 

93. Since many Third World countries had a relatively small grid, the development of 
small and medium power reactors was of special interest to those countries. Such plants 
offered the additional advantages of a simpler design, adaptability to modular construction, 
and greater utilization of the industrial infrastructure of less developed countries. Over the 
preceding years, Pakistan had repeatedly asked the Agency to strengthen its activities in that 
area. As a first step, an international working group could be set up to produce detailed 
technical studies. Concurrently, the Agency might consider sponsoring research, design and 
development activities in that field, placing particular emphasis on nuclear safety. Transfer 
of experience and know-how on the validation and verification of the relevant computer codes 
and models should be facilitated. The search for financial backing for the building of nuclear 
power plants needed to be pursued vigorously and such backing should be along the lines of 
international financial support for fossil fuel and hydroelectric projects. 
94. He commended the Agency's work on the extension of the lifetime of nuclear power 
plants. A large number of operating nuclear power plants were well into their second or 
third decade of operation and were suffering from various ageing problems. Safe extension 
of the lifetime of those power plants would be of considerable economic benefit to the 
respective countries. Western financial aid through agencies like the European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development had been arranged to improve the safety of some of the 
nuclear power plants in the Russian Federation. The possibility of similar financial support 
to improve the safety of nuclear power plants operating in developing countries should also 
be explored. He commended the inter-agency project on data and methodologies for the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 26 

comparative assessment of the health and environmental impact of different means of 
electricity generation and noted that Pakistan was actively participating in that project. 

95. One of the highlights of the Agency's activities over the preceding year had been the 
finalization of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which his delegation had just signed. The 
adoption of that Convention should facilitate international technical co-operation with a view 
to achieving the desired safety levels. 
96. Apart from power production, nuclear energy could also be used to solve such 
problems as lack of fresh water, desertification and salinization of soil. Biotechnology 
techniques to improve crop varieties could be used to reverse deforestation and land 
degradation. Reforestation could go a long way towards meeting demands for fodder and 
fuel and improving the quality of the environment. However, the selection and improvement 
of suitable tree species through conventional methods was a time-consuming process. 
Various biotechnology techniques could help expedite the process by allowing early selection 
with the help of molecular markers. Similarly, various genes responsible for stress tolerance 
and disease resistance could be introduced using recently developed genetic engineering 
techniques. 
97. Recent advances in recombinant DNA technology had opened up new vistas for 
animal biotechnology. Its application in disease diagnosis, vaccine production and the 
development of transgenic animals with desired traits were some of the possibilities which 
should be exploited for the betterment of mankind. The Agency had played a leading role 
in the development and propagation of new technologies. In agriculture, the use of radiationinduced 
mutations in the 1970s and 1980s had helped many countries, including Pakistan, 
to evolve high-yield crop varieties. Similarly, as biotechnological approaches became an 
ever greater component of development strategies, the Agency should play its due role in 
disseminating that technology as a supplement to nuclear techniques in developing countries. 
98. The Director of the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste, 
Professor Salam, had recently retired after rendering meritorious service to the cause of 
science in the Third World. The ICTP had played a very useful role promoting scientific 
development in the developing countries. Pakistan would co-operate and hoped that under 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 27 

the leadership of the new Director of the Centre, the ICTP would maintain its traditions of 
quality research. 

99. Over the past year, Pakistan had continued to make progress in various areas of 
nuclear technology. The construction of the Chashma nuclear power plant had officially 
started in 1993. Since then, work had proceeded strictly according to schedule. Pakistan 
was completely satisfied with the performance of the Chinese scientists and engineers 
working at the site. Pakistani civil and quality assurance engineers were actively involved 
in the construction work. The Agency had made a useful contribution by evaluating the 
safety of the design. In addition, the fuel channel integrity assessment project for the 
Karachi nuclear power plant had been successfully completed. He thanked the Agency and 
the various Canadian agencies for their co-operation and help in that regard. 
100. A fully fledged National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic Engineering had 
started operating at Faisalabad. It had been formally inaugurated in January 1994. The 
Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission had developed isotope-aided research programmes on 
nutrition and reproduction in the buffalo and the goat. The Agency could help that research 
by providing relevant assistance in such fields as RIA, ELISA and genetic mapping of 
different breeds. 
101. In the fields of agriculture, cotton production in Pakistan had dropped by over 
4 million bales over the preceding three years owing to a virus epidemic which could not be 
controlled using chemicals. Material was being developed which was resistant to the virus. 
In the field of hydrology, the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology had 
introduced isotope-aided techniques to solve a number of hydrological problems relating to 
groundwater resource evaluation and development. In the area of nuclear medicine, 
construction work had started on two new medical centres, the Karachi Institute of 
Radiotherapy and Nuclear Medicine and the Punjab Institute of Nuclear Medicine at 
Faisalabad. With the establishment of those centres, the number of medical centres which 
had been established by the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission would increase to eleven. 
In the field of industrial applications, a fully fledged centre for non-destructive testing would 
start operating soon. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 28 

102. The proposed amendment of Article VI of the Agency's Statute had been under 
discussion for a long time. Since the last revision of Article VI there had been a 
considerable increase in membership of the Agency and substantial progress had been made 
in the nuclear programmes of several Member States. There was therefore an urgent need 
to enlarge the Board. The increasing number of countries with advanced nuclear 
programmes should be allowed to play their due role in the principal executive body of the 
Agency as designated members; similarly, the number of elected members should be 
increased to mitigate the under-representation of certain areas. The pursuit of consensus had 
blocked any significant progress in the matter. It was therefore an opportune moment to 
establish a more effective mechanism for pursuing serious negotiations. 
103. General Conference resolutions GC(XXXVII)/RES/621 and 622 had called for 
enhanced representation of the developing countries among Professional staff and an increase 
in the number of women in the Secretariat. Commendable improvements had been made in 
those areas. However, the Agency needed to take more effective steps in that direction. 
104. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia) said his country attached great importance to 
strengthening technical co-operation, particularly with other Arab and African States. As the 
host country of the Arab Atomic Energy Commission, Tunisia endeavoured to promote cooperation 
between Arab countries on the peaceful uses of nuclear techniques. It had been 
the first African State to join AFRA. Its ties to the African continent had deep historical, 
geographical and civilization roots. In June 1994, Tunisia had hosted the African summit 
attended by the reunified African family of nations after the return of South Africa. South 
Africa had done away with its reprehensible policy of apartheid and had established a new 
regime aimed at achieving a balanced and integrated society which assured the rights of all. 
Tunisia believed that the difficulties facing the African continent were mainly due to a lack 
of adequate international support for African development efforts, as well as its high debt 
burden. To remedy the situation intensified technical co-operation was needed as well as a 
greater interest in all areas of African development, particularly through the AFRA project. 
Tunisia was grateful to all those States which supported that project. 
105. The developing countries were basing great hopes for the rational development of 
nuclear energy on the strengthening of technical co-operation with the Agency - the ideal 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 29 

framework for international co-operation on the peaceful uses of nuclear techniques. In the 
context of the African countries, Tunisia called for higher priority to be accorded to small 
and medium power nuclear plants; by ensuring optimum design and reducing construction 
costs developing countries could use them to meet their energy and drinking water 
requirements. Greater opportunities for training, as well as more broad-based scientific 
meetings, were required on small and medium power plants. In resolution 
GC(XXXIV)/RES/540, which related to a plan for producing potable water economically, 
the General Conference had requested the Agency to assess the costs of potable water 
production using nuclear desalination plants and to make a comparison with the costs of 
desalination by other means. In order to help solve the increasing need for water in the 
world due to population growth, a number of developing countries were counting on the 
development of adequate and cost-effective nuclear techniques for seawater desalination. He 
therefore urged the Agency to attach greater importance to such projects. He also asked the 
Agency to support the North African regional programme for desalination using nuclear 
techniques in addition to programmes developed by groups of experts studying and designing 
small and medium power nuclear reactors. Tunisia, for its part, was willing to strengthen 
its efforts with regard to feasibility studies. 

106. Progress achieved in food preservation by irradiation had provided a tool for ensuring 
food self-sufficiency. The developing countries had chronic difficulties with the storage of 
foodstuffs and Tunisia believed that strengthening co-operation in that area would have a 
positive impact. Tunisia had elaborated a pilot irradiation plant under the supervision of its 
National Centre for Nuclear Science and Technology. It was grateful for the moral and 
material support it had received from other countries, particularly African countries, in that 
respect. 
107. Tunisia welcomed the accession of new parties to the NPT and praised the Agency 
for the efforts it had made in that regard. Accession alone, however, was not enough. It 
must be accompanied by an effective safeguards system. It was therefore necessary for all 
Member States to conclude safeguards agreements. Tunisia, which had concluded such an 
agreement with the Agency in 1989, had endeavoured to fulfil its safeguards obligations. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 30 

108. Tunisia noted with satisfaction the successful conclusion of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety. That Convention represented a considerable advance in international co-operation. 
Member States acknowledged their obligations and duties and accepted that nuclear activities 
in one State had an effect on neighbouring States. Tunisia hoped that there would be an 
increase in international activities in support of nuclear safety and radiation protection as well 
as safeguards procedures. 
109. The African countries, aware of the danger of nuclear proliferation and convinced that 
non-proliferation in their continent would help to reinforce co-operation both in Africa and 
the world as a whole, had announced at the 1994 African summit that they would renounce 
the acquisition of nuclear weapons and called on all other peace-loving countries to do 
likewise. Nuclear weapons control in general and non-proliferation in particular would help 
establish peace in the Middle East. The application of comprehensive safeguards to all 
nuclear activities in the Middle East with a view to establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
was the best way of achieving a global and just settlement of the chronic problems that had 
been suffered by that region for decades. Tunisia fully supported the Agency's efforts to that 
end. 
110. Turning to safeguards in general, he urged all States to co-operate with the Agency 
in order to enable it to carry out its functions in that field. The Member States all agreed 
that it was necessary to attach the utmost importance to international safeguards. Tunisia 
believed that the advanced nuclear countries, which benefited the most from atomic energy, 
should increase their share of the costs of the required inspections, control methods and 
equipment, but not to the detriment of technical co-operation activities. Any useful and 
equitable international safeguards system must go hand in hand with international technical 
co-operation. Universal safeguards - applicable to all members of the international 
community and covering all areas of nuclear activity - would ensure the safety of mankind. 
111. Mr. HOGBERG (Sweden) said the Swedish Government attached great 
importance to the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. Efforts to uphold and strengthen 
that regime were vital in order to maintain and enhance international peace and security. 
During the nearly 25 years that the NPT had been in force, the Treaty had been of 
fundamental importance: it was the most successful disarmament treaty ever. The Swedish 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 31 

Government supported the indefinite and unconditional extension of the NPT and considered 
it imperative that every effort be made to achieve the successful outcome of the Extension 
Conference in 1995. All States that had not yet done so should accede to the treaty at the 
earliest possible date, thereby making it truly universal. Sweden welcomed Kazakhstan, 
Georgia and Kyrgyzstan as new parties to the Treaty and was pleased that the Moldavian 
parliament had ratified it. As to Ukraine, Sweden felt that it should accede to the NPT as 
a non-nuclear-weapon State and while, welcoming the Board's approval of a safeguards 
agreement between Ukraine and the Agency, hoped that it would be succeeded rapidly by a 
safeguards agreement under the NPT. All States parties to the NPT that had not yet done 
so should conclude and implement the required safeguards agreements with the Agency 
without delay. 

112. Other positive developments had occurred in 1994 in the non-proliferation field. The 
Tlatelolco Treaty had come into force for Argentina, Brazil and Chile, and Cuba had recently 
announced its decision to accede to it. The Quadripartite Agreement between Argentina, 
Brazil, ABACC and the Agency had now entered into force. In Africa, progress had been 
made towards establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Sweden hoped that all the States 
concerned would soon reach agreement on all provisions for the establishment of such a zone 
and expressed its appreciation of the Agency's preparatory work. 
113. There had been serious challenges to the non-proliferation system in recent years. 
Iraq had violated the NPT by secretly embarking on a nuclear weapons programme. Sweden 
commended the Agency for the work carried out, in close co-operation with UNSCOM, to 
trace and eliminate Iraq's nuclear weapons potential, and welcomed the steps taken in respect 
of long-term monitoring and verification. The DPRK had refused to meet its obligations 
under its full-scope safeguards agreement with the Agency, thereby creating doubts as to its 
intentions in the nuclear field. Sweden urged the DPRK to fulfil those obligations and to 
abide by the resolutions of the Board of Governors, the General Conference and the Security 
Council, as well as by the statement made on 30 May 1994 by its own President. Everything 
that could enhance the openness to scrutiny of the DPRK's nuclear programme was worthy 
of support. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 32 

114. Non-proliferation efforts alone could not guarantee international peace and security: 
they had to be supplemented by verifiable disarmament measures. It was gratifying that 
negotiations on a comprehensive test ban treaty were now well under way at the Conference 
on Disarmament in Geneva. Those negotiations should continue with a view to achieving 
an agreed text at the earliest possible date. Sweden had proposed that the Agency be 
entrusted with verification of the treaty. Reduction in nuclear arsenals presupposed a cut-off 
in production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices. The 
mandate for the negotiation of a cut-off treaty was now being discussed in the Conference 
on Disarmament. 
115. A thorough review was being carried out of the Agency's safeguards system to 
increase its effectiveness and cost efficiency, and important new measures had been 
introduced. Sweden strongly supported the Agency's programme in that area and looked 
forward to a decision by the Board on an alternative safeguards system. 
116. The Agency's safeguards responsibilities were increasing and all States should ensure 
that it was provided with adequate resources for meeting its statutory obligations. A lasting 
and equitable solution had to be found to the vital question of the financing of safeguards. 
117. Recent information about illegal sales and transport of nuclear material was a matter 
of concern. The main responsibility in that field rested with national Governments and 
authorities. All Member States should take the necessary measures to prevent illicit 
trafficking in nuclear material and should support co-ordinated international co-operation and 
assistance programmes with that objective. The Director General should intensify the 
Agency's activities that supported Member States in that area and should examine additional 
options for Agency action. 
118. Sweden welcomed the adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety by the 
Diplomatic Conference in June 1994 and urged all Member States to sign and implement the 
Convention as soon as possible. Sweden had just signed the Convention and called for 
unilateral application of its provisions to all nuclear installations, pending the development 
of future international instruments. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 33 

119. His Government welcomed the Board's recent decision to invite the Director General 
to start planning for the drafting of a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management. All Member States should participate in that work in the same spirit of 
co-operation as had been shown in the drafting of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The 
convention's scope should be as wide as possible, covering civil as well as military 
radioactive waste. Sweden looked forward to completion of the Safety Fundamentals on 
radioactive waste management in December 1994. 
120. The Agency's safety review mission programmes provided Member States with 
valuable opportunities for peer review and comparison with good practices in other countries. 
His country also supported initiatives to strengthen national radiation protection and nuclear 
safety infrastructures. The work on nuclear safety and radiation protection in Eastern Europe 
and the newly independent States was of particular importance, and the greatest possible 
degree of co-ordination between all parties involved was essential. In that context, the work 
of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage should be completed as soon as 
possible. All States not parties to the Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol should 
accede to those instruments as a necessary step towards the attainment of improved nuclear 
safety. 
121. Sweden attached high priority to the Agency's technical co-operation activities: there 
had been a strong demand for assistance in such areas as food and agriculture, radiation 
protection, safety of nuclear installations and management of radioactive waste. It was 
important that the Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund should receive financing on 
a firm and predictable basis and it was very unsatisfactory that all Member States had not 
pledged and paid according to their share of the Fund's target. Sweden urged all Member 
States to pledge and pay promptly: Sweden, for its part, had pledged its share of the 1995 
target and its total extrabudgetary contributions for technical assistance averaged nearly 
$1 million annually. Sweden valued the great competence with which the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation activities were carried out and welcomed the new emphasis on 
the development of model projects and the improvement of overall implementation in 1993. 
122. The coming 12 months would offer many opportunities as well as challenges for the 
Agency; Sweden looked forward to further progress in all the Agency's main activity areas. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 34 

123. Mr. DJITEDJIAN (Armenia) said that since joining the Agency, Armenia had 
always fulfilled its obligations while endeavouring to contribute to the work of the 
organization. Armenia was bound by major commitments to the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy and had ratified all the relevant conventions. It also intended to sign the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety, which it would implement as a way of demonstrating its commitment to 
nuclear safety. Furthermore, its nuclear power plant operators had recently joined the World 
Association of Nuclear Operators. 
124. Armenia's nuclear power plant at Metsamor comprised two WWER-440/270 reactors. 
Annual output from the plant was 5000 million kW, equivalent to one third of all electrical 
power production in 1988. The two reactors had been installed in 1976 and 1980 and shut 
down in February and March 1989. 
125. Armenia was now facing the difficult economic and social situation characterizing all 
the republics of the former USSR, a situation exacerbated by the scarcity of domestic energy 
resources and the complexity of the transport network. Despite such adverse conditions, the 
country had managed to maintain a democratic orientation in its political institutions and 
economic development; it had preserved domestic political stability and industrial and 
scientific potential, while continuing with the process of economic reforms. Although a 
cease-fire with Azerbaijan of unspecified duration had gone into effect, the standard of living 
had plummeted and the population was experiencing considerable hardship. Over the past 
two winters, living conditions had been very difficult owing to the scarcity of energy 
(a maximum of two hours of electricity every day) - virtually no homes had been heated. 
In 1993, Armenia had produced 6300 million kW of electrical energy, only 40% of the 
overall demand, and most of the electricity produced had gone to industry. 
126. The severe energy restrictions imposed in recent years had exhausted all domestic 
reserves and now threatened the reform process. Policies were being carried out that would 
enable the country to increase its energy potential over the long term. Small hydroelectric 
plants were being built and renovated and the capacity of thermal power plants was to be 
increased, while construction of a gas pipeline in the south of the country would continue. 
However, numerous studies carried out by Armenian and foreign specialists indicated that 
there was no solution in the short term other than re-starting the nuclear power plant. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 35 

127. In conformity with the Agency's recommendations, a power plant operating body had 
been set up as well as a national monitoring authority - a governmental advisory committee 
dealing with the use of atomic energy and nuclear safety. All the problems connected with 
the startup of the second reactor had been charted, taking into account assessments made by 
organizations of the Russian Ministry for Atomic Energy, experts from French firms and the 
Agency itself. 
128. The monitoring of the primary and secondary systems and equipment was close to 
completion, and the metal in the reactor vessel, pipes and body of the steam generators as 
well as in the main circulation pumps had already been tested. Equipment for steam and 
water circulation and turbo-generators had likewise been checked. 
129. Considerable repairs had been made to enhance the plant's seismic stability, and 
Agency experts had given effective assistance there. The studies would be completed in 
October 1994, but it could already be stated that there were no serious problems. The 
Agency had provided assistance on technical, legal, organizational and safety matters, and 
Armenia was carefully studying all the relevant proposals. It hoped that the technical 
co-operation missions to be carried out in 1995 would be equally fruitful. 
130. The results of assessments made to date showed that key sectors of the nuclear power 
plant could be made operational, so there were no major technical obstacles to its reopening. 
The rehabilitation work by specialized Armenian, Russian and other organizations was 
proceeding according to plan. Russian groups were overseeing project implementation and 
organization, as well as the mobilization of specialists. His Government attached particular 
importance to the training and organization of the teams to work at the plant. The final stage 
preceding the startup of the plant would start shortly. 
131. The Government of Russia had provided invaluable technical and financial assistance, 
which had been covered by an agreement between the two Governments and co-ordinated 
through an intergovernmental commission. Armenia had greatly appreciated the personal 
participation of high-level officials from the Russian Ministry for Atomic Energy in 
organizing the rehabilitation efforts and had welcomed their regular visits to the nuclear 
power plant. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 36 

132. There was no doubt that the primary concern was operational safety, and a plan aimed 
at increasing it had been drawn up, covering the period both before and after restart of the 
plant. His Government believed that the level of safety at the plant was at least equivalent 
to that of similar facilities currently in operation, but in order to achieve an even higher 
level, additional technical and financial assistance was indispensable. He hoped that other 
countries would become involved in the efforts made by Russia, whose commitment had been 
given despite its own economic and financial difficulties. The Agency's Member States 
which were leaders in nuclear technology were well aware of Armenia's unusual energy 
situation and of the economic viability of reopening a plant whose technical reliability would 
be equivalent to that of similar facilities operating elsewhere. 
133. In conclusion, he hoped that, in accordance with its declared principles, the Agency 
would continue to lead the international community's efforts to promote the peaceful and safe 
use of nuclear energy. Its advisory services for the restarting of unit 2 at the Metsamor plant 
were deeply appreciated and represented a form of international co-operation that fully 
confirmed the Agency's reputation and image. 
134. Mr. PAEMEN (European Commission) said that, for the European 
Commission, the most significant event since the previous session had been the entry into 
force in November 1993 of the Maastricht Treaty creating the European Union. The Treaty 
had established a common foreign and security policy for the Union and non-proliferation had 
been identified from the very beginning as one of its priorities. 
135. A second crucial event of the previous year in Brussels had been the successful 
completion of the negotiations with Austria, Finland, Norway and Sweden. While the final 
word lay of course with the peoples of those countries, the European Commission would be 
very pleased if all of them were to ratify - as had Austria - the decision of their Governments 
to join the Union. 
136. The safety of nuclear reactors was the responsibility of the countries that operated 
them. However, industrialized countries considered the improvement of the safety of 
reactors built to earlier standards in Central and Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union 
to be one of the top priorities. In 1994, both the Corfu European Council and the G-7 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 37 

summit in Naples had reaffirmed that priority and had provided additional policy guidelines 
as well as financial commitments. 

137. The G-7 had particularly welcomed the progress made in the implementation of the 
nuclear safety assistance programme agreed earlier, while confirming that an effective 
framework for co-ordinated action was in place. The Commission had continued to play a 
major role within that framework, relying on the Agency's sound technical advice. 
138. During the past year, the European Union's TACIS and PHARE nuclear safety 
assistance programmes had achieved significant progress in all areas included in the G-7 
programme of action. However, the continuation and enhancement of technical assistance 
depended on a satisfactory solution of the nuclear civil liability issue. The Commission 
appreciated the efforts of the Agency and of the NEA in that sensitive area and encouraged 
both institutions to continue to contribute towards a proper long-term solution, which in the 
view of his delegation should be based on the accession by all countries receiving technical 
assistance to the relevant international conventions. 
139. Given the serious concerns about the safety of the Chernobyl reactors, the European 
Union at the Corfu European Council and the Naples G-7 Summit had put forward a specific 
action plan aimed at achieving an early closure of the Chernobyl site. That plan had included 
the completion of three new Ukrainian reactors to adequate safety standards within the 
context of an overall energy strategy that incorporated conservation measures and the use of 
alternative sources. To implement the Chernobyl plan, the G-7 had agreed in Naples to 
provide an additional initial amount of $200 million in grants while in Corfu the European 
Union had expressed its readiness to raise $500 million in European loans and to provide an 
extra $100 million in grants over three years. 
140. To be effective, the international safety assistance efforts had to be part of broader 
reforms. A fundamental measure in that respect should be the consolidation in recipient 
countries of legally based and independent safety authorities with adequate resources. In 
addition, short-term grants should be followed by loans to fund long-term projects, including 
the completion of new and better reactors. The European Union would be able to participate 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 38 

directly in those lending actions via the EURATOM loan facility and the European 
Investment Bank. 

141. Turning to more general nuclear safety matters, he noted that a more solid framework 
for international co-operation was needed. The Commission therefore welcomed the 
successful conclusion in June of the Diplomatic Conference that had adopted the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety , now open for signature. The Commission was taking the necessary steps 
to enable EURATOM to conclude the Convention in its own right and looked forward to a 
rapid entry into force. 
142. The Commission was now ready to contribute to the commencement of work on a 
radioactive waste convention. At the European Union level, the Commission had already 
prepared a radioactive waste management strategy. 
143. The past year had witnessed a number of trade developments of paramount 
importance. First and foremost, the Uruguay Round had been successfully completed. One 
of its major results was the creation of a new World Trade Organization, which would be 
open to universal membership and should therefore be a key instrument in promoting open, 
non-discriminatory and equitable trade at the global level. 
144. In the energy sector, the negotiations to prepare the European Energy Charter Treaty 
had been concluded and that Treaty would be open for signature by the end of the year. 
That international instrument was the result of another European Union initiative and was 
expected to improve the trade and investment in energy between the countries of Europe and 
some of their major non-European counterparts. 
145. As far as the international uranium markets were concerned, the Commission had 
been monitoring closely recent developments, including the significant broadening of offers 
from the countries of the former Soviet Union. The Commission would continue to address 
those developments taking into account the need to assure a stable long-term supply as well 
as the viability of basic nuclear industries in the European Union. 
146. In view of the characteristics of trade in nuclear materials and the relevant political 
considerations, it should be in the interest of all Member States to find a multilateral 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 39 

arrangement, as had already been done for materials of much lower economic and strategic 
value. 

147. The European Union attached the greatest importance to the preparatory work for the 
1995 NPT Extension Conference. The Corfu European Summit had agreed on the guidelines 
for European Union joint action, the main objective being to secure an indefinite and 
unconditional extension of the NPT at that Conference. The European Commission fully 
supported the joint action. 
148. In the area of EURATOM safeguards, which covered the civil nuclear material in the 
Union, the Commission was pleased to report generally smooth and positive relations 
between the EURATOM and Agency safeguards inspectorates. Implementation of the new 
partnership approach was producing efficiency gains and reduced logistic costs for the 
Agency which was a major contribution at a time of increasing challenges and budgetary 
constraints. 
149. Illicit trade in nuclear and other radioactive materials had unfortunately increased in 
the past few years and could become a significant threat to safety and to non-proliferation 
objectives. That trafficking should be stopped at its source or, if that proved impossible, 
through appropriate co-operation between all parties concerned. Consequently, the 
Commission was increasing its bilateral assistance and co-operation with countries where that 
trade might originate. Its actions were intended to help reinforce and modernize in potential 
source countries the systems of accounting for and control of nuclear and radioactive 
materials and to improve the capabilities of their competent authorities. 
150. In the area of nuclear safety, progress had been made with the Community Basic 
Safety Standards for Radiation Protection. Intense and satisfactory technical co-operation was 
ensuring that the European Union's binding text was consistent with the Agency's 
recommendations. The Commission and the Agency had complementary roles: the latter 
was generally concerned with standards in the form of recommendations that addressed the 
entire world, while the Commission prepared legally binding instruments for adoption by the 
European Union. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.3 
page 40 

151. That complementarity of the Commission and the Agency had been highlighted 
in 1994 by the work on radiation protection, safety assistance and safeguards, but it could 
expand to other areas in the future. The Commission looked forward to continuing to work 
actively and constructively with all of its international partners. Its overriding objective was 
to ensure that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy continued to make a positive contribution 
towards sustainable growth and the well-being of present and future generations. 
The meeting rose at 1.20 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
14 December 1994 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center, Vienna 
on Tuesday, 20 September 1994, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
Later: Mr. MARSCHIK (Austria) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1993 1-105 
(continued) 

Statements by the delegates of the following States 
and organization: 

Bangladesh 1 -6 
Zambia 7 - 16 
Malaysia 17-23 
Netherlands 24 - 30 
Algeria 31-37 
Finland 38 - 44 
Romania 45 - 54 
India 55 - 68 
Argentina 69 - 78 
Canada 79 - 86 
Slovenia 87 - 94 
Poland 95 - 100 
Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 101 - 105 

[*] GC(XXXVIII)/25 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/11/Rev.2. 
93- 03832 (X) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 2 

ABACC 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASCOT 
ASSET 
DPRK 
EURATOM 
INSARR 
IPERS 
Joint FAO/IAEA 
Division 

NPT 
OPANAL 

OSART 
R&D 
RBMK 
RCA 

RIA 
SAGSI 
START 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 
Vienna Convention 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Assessment of Safety Culture in Organizations Team 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Integrated Safety Assessment of Research Reactors 
International Peer Review Service 

Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and 
Agriculture 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in latin America and 
the Caribbean 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Research and development 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Radioimmunoassay 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1961) 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(continued) 

1. Mr. MANNAN (Bangladesh) confirmed Bangladesh's unconditional commitment 
to the use of nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes, as reflected in its 
commitment to the NPT, in its safeguards agreement with the Agency and in its various 
research and development programmes. As it prepared to enter the twenty-first century and 
moved towards a market economy, Bangladesh recognized the need not only to import 
technologies but also to develop technologies which responded to local needs in order to 
maximize the benefits it obtained from its limited resources. International organizations such 
as the Agency had an important role to play in that context, with regard both to technology 
transfer and to the provision of assistance in the development of indigenous technologies. 
2. Nuclear-related R&D programmes in Bangladesh included programmes connected with 
food preservation, the sterilization of medical supplies, medical care, agricultural production, 
radiation protection and environmental monitoring, quality control and quality assurance, 
electronic instrumentation and control systems, radioisotope production, hydrology and 
studies on sedimentation, industrial applications including non-destructive testing, and 
radiation protection and monitoring services. To address its short-, medium- and long-term 
problems, Bangladesh had drawn up an action plan for R&D in nuclear science and 
technology with a view to linking various research activities to global objectives and ensuring 
the appropriate utilization of limited financial, infrastructural and human resources. It hoped 
that the Agency and other international organizations would help it implement that plan 
effectively. 
3. The services being provided in the diagnosis and treatment of certain diseases using 
nuclear and other state-of-the-art techniques demonstrated the practical success of laboratoryscale 
R&D work in Bangladesh. Thanks to programmes on non-destructive testing and 
elemental analysis, it had been possible to enhance the interaction between the research 
community and industry; also, application of the techniques in question in the public and 
private sectors had already yielded some successes, including successes in the area of human 
resources development. Bangladesh hoped that similar services would become widely 
available in due course. Imported foodstuffs and consumables were being subjected to 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 4 

controls in order to determine their acceptability for consumption from the point of view of 
radiation levels. Efforts were under way to enhance the utilization of Bangladesh's research 
reactor through the implementation of various research programmes and the production of 
radioisotopes. Thanks to Agency support, the country's Gamma Irradiation Facility, which 
had been established with the co-operation of a local private company, had made possible the 
commercialization of R&D results relating to the preservation of food items and to the 
sterilization of medical supplies and equipment. In that context, he commended the Agency's 
technical assistance programme, thanked the Agency for the support it had given to R&D 
programmes in Bangladesh and expressed the hope that the Agency would help Bangladesh 
to improve the utilization of existing facii;<ies, especially the research reactor. 

4. As regards legislation, the Nuclear Safety and Radiation Control Act had been passed 
by the National Assembly and was already in force, and some regulations which would 
ensure its effective application were in the process of being formulated. 
5. Bangladesh, which was actively involved in various projects within the framework of 
the RCA, particularly research programmes, believed RCA activities should be extended to 
areas such as the use of tracer techniques in groundwater surveys and in studies on flows and 
sedimentation in international rivers. Programmes on the application of nuclear techniques 
in industry, medicine, agriculture and other sectors of the economy were expected to enhance 
the capabilities of RCA countries. Also, the project on nuclear power should be extended 
in order to enable the countries concerned to meet the challenges they were facing in their 
energy development programmes. Bangladesh was hosting various RCA activities (courses, 
regional workshops and technical committee meetings) which had a positive impact on its 
own programmes, and it was grateful to the Agency for the support provided in that regard. 
6. It was feared that economic activities in Bangladesh would suffer seriously from a 
major energy shortage in general, and an electricity shortage in particular, unless Bangladesh 
succeeded in increasing the capacity of its national grid. His country was currently 
encouraging foreign private companies to participate in the establishment of power plants by 
offering incentive packages. It would be possible to satisfy only part of the country's 
projected energy demand with indigenous resources, but nuclear power generation implemented 
by public-sector, private-sector or joint-venture enterprises - had been identified 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 5 

as a viable alternative. The efforts of Bangladesh to implement its first nuclear power 
project, the technical and economic justification of which had been clearly demonstrated, 
were coming up against financial obstacles. The potential financiers, including international 
institutions, seemed to have insufficient information about various aspects of nuclear power 
(economics; adaptability to conditions in developing countries; safety and environmental 
considerations), and he would like to see the Agency addressing those issues as a matter of 
urgency and exploring opportunities for the international financing of nuclear power 
programmes. 

7. Mr. MAKA (Zambia) thanked the Director General for his opening statement 
and the detailed report on the Agency's activities in 1993, which, despite some constraints, 
had been implemented in a competent and efficient manner, as the Annual Report for 1993 
showed. 
8. The Agency's technical co-operation activities played a crucial role in the utilization 
of nuclear science and technology to resolve some of the developing world's problems. 
Zambia was involved in four national projects, four regional projects and five research 
contracts covering agriculture, radiation protection, health and scientific research. Of the 
three research contracts which had been concluded in 1994, one was to be initiated before 
the end of the year. The projects, which should have a positive socio-economic impact, 
included studies of the stability of dip tank chemicals used for the effective eradication of 
ticks on cattle, the production of gamma-sterilized biological tissue grafts for the treatment 
of burns, nitrogen fixation in trees, adverse side-effects of organochlorine pesticides on the 
flora and fauna in Zambia, and the use of radioimmunoassay techniques to improve livestock 
health and productivity. The country's tissue culture laboratory was collaborating with the 
Zambia Seed Company in producing 4000 potato seed microtubers a year. The University 
Hospital in Lusaka was conducting clinical trials with amniotic membrane tissue grafts for 
the treatment of burns which were being sterilized by the cobalt-60 irradiator of the National 
Nuclear Analytical Laboratory. The results obtained were extremely encouraging. 
9. The Agency continued to play a vital role in the training of Zambian personnel in 
nuclear science and technology. In 1994, eight Zambian scientists and technicians had 
attended Agency courses and seminars and 12 training fellowships had been awarded for a 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 6 

total of 42 man-months. He was proud to report that all except two of the Agency-trained 
fellows were still working in Zambia. Institutions in Zambia were complementing the efforts 
of the Agency and other donors in the area of specialized training. In that regard, his 
country hoped the Agency would continue with the project on manpower development in the 
African region, which had contributed to the enhancement of human resources in nuclear 
science and technology. It was grateful to the Agency for providing fellowship holders with 
training in developing countries under conditions similar to those in their countries of origin. 
In 1993, four Zambians had benefited from that kind of arrangement, which promoted cooperation 
among developing countries. 

10. Problems with the maintenance and repair of nuclear equipment continued to hamper 
the effective utilization of certain Agency-donated facilities. Zambia was contributing to 
specialized training in that important area. In 1994, a medical equipment technician from 
a local hospital had spent six months in an electronics workshop which the Agency had 
supported under project ZAM/4/004. Zambian facilities were currently being used for a 
regional workshop on troubleshooting and the repair of power supplies for nuclear 
instruments and personal computers as part of regional project RAF/4/004 on nuclear 
instrument maintenance. He urged donors to support the AFRA activities in question. 
11. Zambia was cognizant of the need for adequate and effective radiation protection as 
a requisite for the safe use of nuclear energy and was continuing its efforts to strengthen its 
national radiation protection service, in particular by increasing staffing levels and funding. 
Further assistance from the Agency was required in order to train new staff, develop codes 
of practice and guidelines, set up calibration facilities and host national and regional courses. 
12. Zambia viewed AFRA, to which it had become a party on 20 December 1993, as a 
sure way of sharing resources, knowledge and expertise in Africa. His country hoped the 
Agency would continue to support AFRA projects strongly through the technical co-operation 
budget, since there was a risk that the financing of those projects would suffer from the 
difficulties which certain Member States were encountering owing to their economic 
structural adjustment programmes or to natural catastrophes such as drought. Zambia 
welcomed the consultations which were taking place between the Agency and States party 
to AFRA with a view to extending Agency support to AFRA for a further five years. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 7 

13. Zambia welcomed the Republic of South Africa back to the United Nations family, 
and in particular to the Agency. That country's financial position and expertise should be 
of great benefit to the development of nuclear science and technology in Africa. The new 
situation in South Africa would certainly speed up efforts to make Africa a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone. 
14. The delegation of Zambia approved the measures the Agency was taking to reduce 
the costs - while maintaining the quality and effectiveness - of the safeguards system and 
welcomed the safeguards statement for 1993, which showed that the Agency was succeeding 
in ensuring that only peaceful applications of nuclear energy were promoted. Zambia was 
to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency during the current session of the 
General Conference and would like all States, and in particular those which had significant 
nuclear activities, to accede to the NPT and conclude comprehensive safeguard agreements 
with the Agency. 
15. His delegation was still concerned about the lack of progress in the consultations 
within the Board of Governors on the questions of amending Article VI. A. 2 of the Statute 
and revising Article VI as a whole. It strongly supported the proposal that the current 
imbalance in the geographical representation in the Board be redressed by ensuring that the 
statutory principle of equitable representation was applied to the regions of Africa and the 
Middle East and South Asia. Also, Zambia supported the call for reliable and predictable 
funding for technical assistance and thought that the Agency should ensure a balance between 
its promotional activities and the other activities within its mandate. 
16. With regard to voluntary contributions to the TACF for 1995, he noted that the target 
was US $61.5 million and that Zambia's share of that target was $6150. 
17. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia), noting with satisfaction the thorough analysis of the 
Agency's activities made by the Director General in his opening statement, said that Malaysia 
would continue to support the Agency in the accomplishment of its mission. In addition, his 
Government, conscious of the assistance and co-operation which Malaysia received from the 
Joint FAO/IAEA Division, congratulated the Division on the occasion of its thirtieth 
anniversary. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 8 

18. In Malaysia, promotion of the uses of nuclear science and technology was entrusted 
to the Malaysian Institute for Nuclear Technology Research, whose role was to enhance 
national development and economic competitiveness. The Government encouraged the selffinancing 
of all R&D organizations with a view to increasing their autonomy. Programmes 
and projects currently being formulated for inclusion in the seventh Malaysian five-year plan, 
for the period 1996-2000, would be included in the ten-year national development plan and 
would focus on sustainability and the end-user. The acquisition of technology and expertise 
in the nuclear field, particularly for industry, agriculture and medicine, had been financed 
largely by the Malaysian Government, with support provided through the Agency's technical 
assistance and co-operation programme. 
19. His delegation endorsed the Agency's Annual Report and Accounts for 1993. It 
commended the Agency on its prudent management of resources and its endeavour to return 
to normal programme implementation in 1995. Also, it agreed with the new approach 
designed to enable the Agency's main activities to respond better to the real needs of 
Member States. With regard to the proposed programme and budget for 1995 and 1996, 
Malaysia endorsed the idea of reassessing the Agency's programmes in order to determine 
and discontinue those which were no longer relevant. His delegation, acknowledging efforts 
to enhance harmony and compatibility between the Agency's programme and budget 
documents and its accounts documents, felt that financial allocations should be based on 
programmes rather than on administrative structure and hoped that resolution 
GC(XXXVI)/RES/581 would be implemented very soon. 
20. Malaysia pledged the sum of $73 800 to the TACF for 1995, in line with its share 
based on the indicative planning figures. Reaffirming his country's intention to do the same 
in the future, he called on other Member States to pay their share of the target in a timely 
manner. It was essential that all Member States continuously support the Agency's activities 
in order to ensure that countries requiring assistance received it. Malaysia was fully aware 
of the fact that the strengthening of technical co-operation activities had to be based on an 
increase in the Agency's resources, both financial and other. It believed in encouraging an 
effective distribution of resources, expertise and experience and would continue to play its 
role in strengthening technical co-operation by hosting scientists from other Member States 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 9 

and providing the services of Malaysian experts whenever required. Also, it wished to 
encourage and strengthen co-operation between Malaysian institutes and their counterparts 
in other Member States. Malaysia owned a 1 MW(th) research reactor of the Triga Mark II 
type, which was reputed for its safety, simplicity and economy; the reactor was being used 
for education, training and research and for isotope production, nuclear analyses and 
instrument calibration. 

21. Malaysia appreciated the assistance provided by the Agency under the RCA and 
would contribute $50 000 for UNDP programmes being implemented under the RCA during 
the current five-year period. It was pleased with its bilateral co-operation with such countries 
as Australia and Japan and hoped to establish similar, mutually beneficial, ties with other 
countries. 
22. Malaysia supported the Agency's role in monitoring and verifying the implementation 
of safeguards agreements. It considered that the current financial arrangements for 
safeguards were satisfactory and needed no modification. While efforts to strengthen the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system within the framework of 
Programme 93+2 were laudable, care should be taken not to incur additional costs. In that 
context, Malaysia - which advocated universal adherence to the NPT - congratulated Latvia, 
Uzbekistan, Croatia, Slovenia, Zambia and Kazakhstan on having concluded NPT safeguards 
agreements. Also, it commended India's readiness to allow Agency inspections of its nuclear 
facilities pursuant to its safeguards agreement. In addition, it welcomed ratification by 
Ukraine of START-I. 
23. His delegation welcomed adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which should 
be implemented without delay, and was pleased that South Africa's rights in the Agency had 
been restored. Finally, it noted with satisfaction the conclusions of the Technical Co-
operation Policy Review Seminar and looked forward to their adoption. 
24. Mr. van EBBENHORST TENGBERGEN (Netherlands), fully endorsing the 
statement made by the representative of Germany on behalf of the European Union, said that 
in order to meet the new security challenges of the post-cold war era the Agency had to adapt 
to changes in the world and, more than ever, increase its effectiveness and efficiency. The 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 10 

non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the transfer of nuclear technology for peaceful 
purposes were not only political priorities; they were also increasingly important to society 
as a whole. The fiftieth anniversary of the foundation of the United Nations and the twentyfifth 
anniversary of the entry into force of the NPT, both of which fell in 1995, would mark 
the beginning of a new era for the Agency. 

25. The international non-proliferation regime should provide for reliable verification. 
Improving the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system would strengthen the role 
which the Agency could play and thereby reduce the risk of nuclear material or installations 
remaining undeclared and undetected; also, it would enhance confidence in the Agency's 
safeguards system. It was therefore veiv important that in 1995 the Agency present the 
conclusions of Programme 93+2, which was based on a SAGSI report whose conclusions 
were endorsed by the Government of the Netherlands. Presentation by the Agency of the 
results of its study before the 1995 NPT Conference would improve the chances of achieving 
an unconditional extension of the NPT for an indefinite period, as supported by the 
Netherlands and its European Union partners. The NPT, cornerstone of the international 
non-proliferation regime, was also of great value for international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear technology. His delegation therefore called upon the countries not 
yet party to the NPT to accede, making it as universal in its adherence as it already was in 
its scope. 
26. The credibility of the safeguards system was closely related to universal acceptance 
of that system. The Netherlands welcomed ratification of the Tlatelolco Treaty by Argentina, 
Brazil and Chile, which increased the likelihood of a nuclear-weapon-free zone being created 
in Latin America and the Caribbean in the near future. It also welcomed efforts, which 
might soon take effect, to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. Those developments 
would certainly serve as an example to other regions of the world, such as South Asia - or 
the Middle East, where the continuing peace process gave grounds to hope for greater 
political stability, economic co-operation and security guaranteed by international agreements, 
including agreements in the nuclear field. 
27. The credibility of the safeguards system would be enhanced if a solution was found 
to problems concerning application of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK. His 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 11 

Government supported the efforts of the Director General and the United States to reach a 
solution acceptable to the international community as a whole. 

28. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that the Convention on Nuclear Safety was a major 
achievement and expressed the hope that many countries, particularly those with nuclear 
power plants, would sign, ratify and implement the Convention soon. The Netherlands had 
signed the Convention that very day. Also, his delegation hoped that the Safety 
Fundamentals documents relating to radioactive waste management would soon be approved 
by the Board of Governors and that a convention on radioactive waste management would 
subsequently be drawn up. It acknowledged the work done by the Agency to enhance the 
safety of nuclear power plants in Central and Eastern Europe. 
29. With regard to the remarks made by the Director General on illicit trafficking in 
nuclear material, his delegation underlined the importance of the initiative taken by Germany 
on behalf of the European Union. 
30. Referring to the financial difficulties faced by the Agency, he said that, while some 
progress had been made in the payment of contributions, it was nevertheless necessary to 
establish clear priorities and reduce costs wherever possible. Also, he endorsed the Director 
General's plea for more adequate, orderly and predictable financing in order that the Agency 
might carry out the activities called for by Member States. For its part, the Netherlands 
would pay $900 000 to the TACF, an amount which - as in previous years - corresponded 
to the base rate of assessment for the Netherlands. 
31. Mr. BENBOUZID (Algeria) commended the work being done by the Agency 
and, at the same time, emphasized the extent of the tasks still to be undertaken in order to 
translate the Agency's aims and objectives into reality. The Agency had great experience 
and had demonstrated its capacity to adapt to new requirements. It would undoubtedly 
respond successfully to the current challenges and remain receptive to the legitimate demands 
of the developing countries, which looked forward to a strengthening of technical assistance 
and technology transfer activities with a view to the promotion and widespread application 
of nuclear energy in the cause of peace and the well-being of all peoples. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 12 

32. His delegation was pleased with the quality of the technical assistance being provided 
to Algeria by the Agency under its technical co-operation programme. Agency technical 
co-operation was having a positive social and environmental impact in areas such as health, 
agriculture, hydrology and industry. With the Agency's support, Algeria had started 
producing radiopharmaceuticals and RIA kits and was looking forward to the benefits that 
would accrue from their widespread use. Also, remarkable progress had been made in the 
diagnostic and therapeutic applications of nuclear medicine techniques, and that had led his 
Government to allocate additional funding to that field. There had been major advances in 
industrial gamma radiography as his Government had become aware of the significance of 
quality assurance programmes in industrv. Algeria recognized sound radiation protection 
practices to be essential prerequisites for all nuclear activities and, with Agency assistance, 
had been promoting such practices through the formulation both of regulations and of 
implementation procedures. 
33. Although far from being exhaustive, such examples illustrated Algeria's interest in 
the strengthening of technical co-operation. Also, Algeria attached great importance to the 
activities co-ordinated by the Agency in radioactive waste management, the practical 
utilization of food irradiation, the production of potable water economically through seawater 
desalination using nuclear power, and nuclear safety. In that connection, his delegation 
welcomed the conclusion of a Nuclear Safety Convention and was pleased to announce that 
Algeria was among the first signatories of that important international instrument. 
34. As a firm supporter of nuclear non-proliferation, Algeria had voluntarily and 
unilaterally placed its two nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. It would continue its 
policy of complete transparency with regard to all its nuclear facilities and firmly intended 
to accede to the NPT. Algeria was thus satisfied with the tangible progress made in drafting 
a treaty on an African nuclear-weapon-free zone. The positive developments that had 
occurred in Africa had brought closer the realization of the noble ideal that the African Heads 
of State and Government had been striving for since 1964. 
35. He welcomed the presence at the General Conference's current session of 
Mr. Alfred Nzo, Minister of Foreign Affairs of a united and non-racial South Africa 
exemplifying a democratic society dear to the African heart. The Algerian people and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 13 

Government had followed the South African people's struggle for freedom and rejoiced at 
the historic events of 27 April 1994, which had opened up new prospects for co-operation 
to the benefit of the peoples of Africa. For its part, Algeria intended to encourage 
co-operation at the bilateral, subregional and continental levels and lend its full support to 
the implementation of joint projects, including projects in the context of AFRA. It was to 
be hoped that the Agency and the international community would, through increased 
international assistance, continue to support that co-operation and its future intensification. 

36. The Agency played a fundamental role in creating and strengthening the confidence 
that was essential to the promotion of peaceful uses of atomic energy. In that regard, it 
should be remembered that countries had the right to develop peaceful nuclear programmes, 
to acquire suitable technology and to receive necessary technical assistance. The Agency's 
strength and credibility therefore had to be based on a coherent approach that allowed a 
balance to be achieved between all its activities, particularly those in the areas of safeguards 
and technical co-operation. Its moral authority would be strengthened by an enlargement of 
the Board of Governors, in which developing countries in general and African countries in 
particular were underrepresented. It would also be strengthened if decisive progress could 
be made in the formulation of a global and non-discriminatory approach to the nonproliferation 
of nuclear weapons and in the handling of issues related to disarmament, 
universal peace, regional and international security, the security of non-nuclear-weapon 
States, negative security assurances and the banning of nuclear testing. 
37. Such multiple challenges still had to be met. The continued staunch adherence of 
Member States to the Agency's objectives was a sign of goodwill and of a readiness to 
engage in dialogue directed to peace and progress for all. 
38. Mr. AALTO (Finland) said that, as the statement made by the representative 
of Germany on behalf of the European Union reflected his country's position well, he would 
touch only on those aspects of the Agency's work which were of particular importance to 
Finland. 
39. As a major per capita producer of nuclear power, Finland was strongly committed to 
international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. On one hand, it had 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 14 

benefited from international co-operation in building up its nuclear power generation 
capacity; and on the other, within the framework of the Agency it provided assistance to 
countries in neighbouring areas. 

40. Turning to non-proliferation issues, he said his country favoured the unconditional and 
indefinite extension of the NPT and was participating actively in the preparations for the 
conference on the NPT to be held in 1995. He noted with satisfaction that the Agency, 
whose safeguards system was essential to the NPT's implementation, was making an 
invaluable contribution to the preparatory process. Finland welcomed the important steps 
that the Agency had taken during the past year to further strengthen the safeguards system, 
particularly in relation to the detection of undeclared nuclear facilities. It supported the 
Agency's efforts and was contributing to them. It also welcomed the partnership agreement 
between the Agency and EURATOM; it would lead to urgently needed savings at a time 
when additional facilities were being placed under safeguards in many parts of the world. 
The Agency should seek further ways of performing its duties in as efficient a manner as 
possible, but given the new tasks facing the Agency his country recognized the need to 
determine whether additional human and financial resources were necessary and would be 
prepared to go along with the provision of such additional resources if redeployment and 
streamlining proved insufficient. 
41. Since the previous General Conference session, a significant step forward had been 
taken with the adoption of the Nuclear Safety Convention, which Finland had just signed and 
which it hoped would attract the support of the greatest possible number of countries. His 
delegation considered that the observance of the highest standards in nuclear safety, radiation 
protection and waste management was essential to the continued development of the various 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy. That was why, together with several other States, 
Finland had favoured making the scope of the Convention broader. Finland welcomed the 
commitment of the contracting parties to abide by corresponding principles in all nuclear 
energy applications and to develop an international convention on the safety of radioactive 
waste management. 
42. The Agency had a recognized part to play in the formulation of international 
standards, particularly in the field of nuclear safety. However, it was important to stress the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 15 

fundamental role required of national safety authorities and plant operators in making sure 
that the highest safety standards were duly applied. 

43. In recognition of the Agency's role in technical assistance and co-operation, Finland 
contributed in full its share of the TACF, and it would like to see all other countries doing 
likewise. In that regard, it welcomed the fact that the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme was giving greater prominence to radiation protection, nuclear safety and 
radioactive waste management. 
44. During the past year, Finland had participated actively in the discussion on the 
Agency's priorities. Several useful proposals had been made as regards how best to ensure 
that the Agency had the necessary resources for all the new tasks it was expected to carry 
out. The world was changing, and the role of governments - like that of intergovernmental 
organizations - was changing too. Growing emphasis was being placed on the creation of 
a favourable environment for enterprises, institutions and other actors - both private and 
public. The Agency still had an important normative role to play, but might well no longer 
be required to perform all the substantive tasks - such as basic research - that governments 
had once seen fit to assign to it. In that way, valuable resources could be freed for new tasks 
of greater topical interest. 
45. Mr. PALADE (Romania) said that the Annual Report for 1993 once again 
reflected a positive state of affairs. Despite difficult conditions, the Agency had maintained 
the high quality of its activities. The Director General and the Secretariat deserved the 
highest praise for their constant efforts to overcome the Agency's financial difficulties and 
implement annual programmes for promoting the many peaceful applications of nuclear 
energy, meeting the Agency's ever-increasing safeguards obligations, providing technical 
assistance, enhancing nuclear safety, stimulating R&D, ensuring technology transfer and 
providing specialized training for personnel from Member States. His delegation endorsed 
the Annual Report. 
46. Romania had continued major R&D work in areas such as nuclear physics, reactor 
physics, the interaction of radiation with matter, the physics of materials, cryogenics, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 16 

radiobiology, radioecology and the utilization of isotopes and radiation in agriculture, 
medicine, industry and hydrology. 

47. In the implementation of its nuclear power programme, which was receiving high 
priority, Romania was relying to a great extent on highly qualified foreign specialists and on 
international co-operation, including co-operation within the framework of the Agency. The 
nuclear power option offered a number of advantages: greater energy diversity, and hence 
a greater assurance of energy supplies; better utilization of the country's R&D and industrial 
infrastructures; less environmental pollution. The Cernavoda nuclear power plant, whose 
first unit was due to go into service at the beginning of 1995, would have a considerable 
socio-economic impact on Romania since it would satisfy approximately 10% of the country's 
energy needs. It would have a minimal impact on the environment and would meet the 
safety requirements laid down in international regulatory instruments. His Government was 
grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had given in attaining that objective. 
48. Activities to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were being pursued within 
the framework of the reform and market economy policies of the Romanian Government, 
which was endeavouring to attract foreign capital, particularly for the nuclear power sector. 
The State, which had retained control of the nuclear industry, was responsible for its 
regulation. In that connection, he thanked the Agency for the help it had given his country 
in establishing a regulatory infrastructure for nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
49. With regard to the Agency's budget for 1995, his Government realized that not all 
the priorities of Member States could be accommodated in a zero-real-growth budgetary 
situation. Nevertheless, extensive consultations and in-depth analyses had - in the view of 
his delegation - resulted in a balanced solution. The balance was also attributable to 
important technical adjustments which had been made by the Secretariat and which had 
released additional funds for priority programmes. 
50. The technical assistance and co-operation activities of the Agency were among its 
primary functions and were accorded high priority by developing countries. The only major 
difficulty seemed to be that, owing to a shortage of resources, not all desirable and 
technically feasible projects could be financed. Furthermore, the value of that part of the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 17 

technical co-operation programme which was financed from non-convertible currencies had 
declined, as had the amount of extrabudgetary resources - including funds from UNDP. His 
delegation considered it essential that contributions to the TACF increase and that greater 
support be provided for footnote-a/ projects. Participation in the Agency's technical cooperation 
programme, which was a powerful tool for the transfer of nuclear know-how, had 
helped Romania to strengthen its nuclear power and nuclear safety capabilities and promote 
a large number of nuclear applications in vital sectors such as industry, agriculture, medicine, 
environmental protection and hydrology. His Government was grateful for the contribution 
made by the Agency and a number of Member States to the development of peaceful 
applications of nuclear technology in Romania and had decided, despite budgetary 
constraints, to contribute its full share of the TACF target for 1995 - one half in United 
States dollars and the other half in national currency. 

51. His Government, which associated itself with the efforts being made to strengthen the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime, believed that the large number of States which had acceded 
to the NPT was proof of increasingly widespread acceptance of the principles of nonproliferation, 
in whose implementation the Agency was playing such an important role. With 
regard to safeguards, the challenges recently faced by the Agency, the steps taken by it and 
the solutions devised by it had once again confirmed the Agency's growing role in 
international affairs and its capacity for forceful response. His delegation greatly appreciated 
the way in which the Agency had fulfilled the mandate entrusted to it by the Security Council 
with regard to the DPRK. The resumption of dialogue between the Agency and the DPRK 
and the discussions between the DPRK and certain Member States were grounds for hope 
that the problem would be resolved, thereby considerably enhancing the NPT regime. 
Significant progress had been made over the past two years towards the universality of 
the NPT. That was particularly important in view of the NPT Conference due to be held 
in 1995. His Government regarded the NPT as a crucial element of the international security 
regime and favoured its indefinite extension. 
52. Romania, which in the Board of Governors had strongly supported the measures taken 
to remedy inadequacies in the safeguards system, welcomed SAGSI's recommendations, 
implementation of which should help achieve a more effective and efficient safeguards 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 18 

regime. In accordance with its policy on non-proliferation, his Government had endorsed 
the Nuclear Suppliers Group's new regime for controlling exports of nuclear-related dual-use 
items and placing nuclear supplies under comprehensive safeguards, and it would like all 
other States to do the same. It had introduced national regulations covering the import and 
export of nuclear-related items and technology and had established an effective national 
monitoring mechanism which conformed to international practice. 

53. Romania, which attached great importance to nuclear safety, continued to support the 
Agency's efforts in that field. Thanks to Agency assistance, it now had a clear idea, based 
on internationally accepted guiding principles and good practices, of the requirements which 
its programmes were expected to meet nd of the necessary structures and regulations 
relating to nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
54. His delegation was pleased with the progress made regarding, inter alia, the 
International Nuclear Event Scale, the Agency's emergency response activities, the 
programme of assistance to Central and East European countries, and the preparation of new 
Basic Safety Standards for radiation protection. The various services offered by the Agency 
in the field of nuclear safety and radiation protection were extremely useful, and Romania 
had benefited greatly from them through assessments carried out during construction of its 
nuclear power plant and other nuclear facilities. In conclusion, he said that Romania had 
already signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety adopted on 17 June 1994. 
55. Mr. CHIDAMBARAM (India) said that, from the long-term perspective of 
energy needs, nuclear power represented an inevitable and environmentally benign option, 
in particular for developing countries. The Agency had an important role to play in helping 
its Member States develop nuclear power and in the exchange of technical information. In 
India, nuclear power already accounted for a significant portion of the electricity production 
in the half dozen states where nuclear power plants had been constructed, and that portion 
would increase rapidly in the decades to come. In that regard, he was pleased to announce 
that India's tenth power reactor, at Kakrapar, was due to go critical the following month and 
that the construction of four further reactors was at the half-way stage. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 19 

56. Although, in the eyes of the public, atomic energy meant nuclear power, there were 
also important non-power applications of atomic energy - in agriculture, medicine and 
industry. The Agency could be justly proud of its contribution to the spread of such 
applications, which affected the lives of most individuals and could be a significant factor for 
progress in most developing countries. Thus, in India, urd beans (an important source of 
protein) produced by radiation mutation at the Bhabha Atomic Research Centre accounted 
for almost 90% of the cultivation of that pulse in the state where the Centre was located. 
57. His delegation welcomed the initiatives that the Agency had taken in the area of food 
irradiation. The Agency should each year embark upon at least one such major project of 
demonstrable benefit to people in developing countries. India and other Member States were 
looking forward to the presentation of a programme in the area of isotope hydrology for 
groundwater management. 
58. With regard to another area of non-power applications, he said that the Agency was 
lightly placing emphasis on research reactor utilization, but radioisotope production was 
limited by a shortage of high-flux research reactors. The facilities in some developing 
countries were often under-utilized or beset with problems, including a lack of financial 
support. The Agency should make a special effort to remedy that situation. In that context, 
he reiterated his country's view that the funds available for technical co-operation projects 
should be increased considerably. It was essential that all Member States pay their 
contributions in time. For its part, India would pay its share of the TACF target for 1995. 
59. Turning to safeguards, he said that India had consistently regarded them as one of the 
Agency's important and legitimate functions. The recent increase in safeguards activities 
carried out by the Agency in various parts of the world had placed a heavy strain on its 
resources. It was therefore necessary to concentrate on reducing the cost of implementing 
safeguards while maintaining or improving their effectiveness. The Secretariat's 
Programme 93+2 was a step in the right direction, and his delegation looked forward to the 
proposals arising from it. 
60. References had been made to increasing proliferation concerns in the wake of recent 
reports about plutonium and uranium smuggling. Illegal trafficking in nuclear materials 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 20 

represented a grave threat, particularly when linked to clandestine nuclear programmes. In 
his delegation's view, the only viable solution to the proliferation problem was a global nonproliferation 
regime which was universal, comprehensive, non-discriminatory and linked to 
the goal of complete nuclear disarmament. 

61. India would like to see - as steps towards global nuclear disarmament -a 
comprehensive test ban treaty and a treaty on the cut-off of the production of fissile materials 
for use in nuclear weapons. At the same time, controls on technology should be relaxed and 
gradually removed in order to facilitate nuclear trade and thereby promote peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. 
62. His delegation welcomed the fact that the Agency had already established International 
Working Groups on fast reactors, light-water reactors and gas-cooled reactors. There was 
a strong case for establishing such a group also on heavy-water reactors, a major power 
reactor category. 
63. With regard to safety, the adoption of the Nuclear Safety Convention a few months 
previously had been a major development. India had been among the first States to sign the 
Convention, in whose preparation it was pleased to have taken part, and hoped to deposit its 
instruments of ratification in the near future. India considered that each country was 
responsible to the international community for the safety of its nuclear facilities. There was 
no doubt that the main improvements to be made in nuclear safety were of a technical nature. 
Therefore, the central objective of the Nuclear Safety Convention would be achieved only 
if the Convention led to an open technical dialogue among the signatories in all pertinent 
safety-related areas. 
64. India believed that every country should harness its natural resources in the best 
possible manner. It was for that reason that spent fuel reprocessing followed by uranium and 
plutonium recycling and, in the longer term, utilization of the country's thorium resources 
constituted essential elements of the Indian atomic energy programme. For India, R&D 
activities connected with reprocessing and fast breeder technologies were of the utmost 
importance. Its experience with the fast breeder test reactor at Kalpakkam, which had 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 21 

operated for long periods over the past year at high power levels, had been very 
encouraging. 

65. India's current R&D programme in the field of reactor engineering was focused on 
the engineering design of a 500 MW(e) pressurized heavy-water reactor, the physics and the 
engineering design of a thorium-based advanced heavy-water reactor, technological 
improvements in the maintenance of operating reactors, component qualification, the 
development of diagnostic techniques, reactor safety, and ageing management and 
decommissioning. India's Department of Atomic Energy was uniquely equipped to carry out 
basic and applied research in a number of areas at the frontiers of science and engineering. 
Its current programme included work on synchrotron radiation sources, a giant meter-wave 
radiotelescope facility, gamma ray telescopes, organ imaging systems, parallel processing 
systems, laser facilities, advanced materials and biotechnology. 
66. His Government had recently authorized the commercial irradiation of spices, onions 
and potatoes. The development was a major one for the Indian food processing industry, and 
it was likely that the technique would be extended gradually to cover other products. 
67. India was a leading producer of radioisotopes for diverse applications. A research 
irradiator had been in use successfully since 1991 for sewage sludge hygienization, and the 
results obtained with it might be applied in effluent hygienization as part of the Ganges River 
Action Plan. 
68. India welcomed the opportunity to share its experience of various peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy with other countries, either under bilateral agreements or 
through the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme. There would be both 
financial and practical benefits if the Agency made greater use of the facilities and expertise 
available in developing countries when organizing seminars, recruiting experts or purchasing 
equipment, and he accordingly invited the Agency to make greater use of India's institutions 
and laboratories in its programmes. 
69. Mr. PESCI BQUREL (Argentina), speaking of Argentina's principal 
contributions to the international nuclear non-proliferation regime during the past year, said 
that under the Brazilian-Argentine common system of nuclear materials accounting and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 22 

control those of the two countries' nuclear facilities which were not covered by Agency 
safeguards were now subject to bilateral safeguards. ABACC had carried out on time all 
operations relating to inspections, technical support, nuclear materials accounting and coordination 
with the Agency which had been planned for 1994. The agreement between 
Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency for the application of safeguards and the general 
part of the corresponding subsidiary arrangements had entered into force on 4 March 1994. 
Since then the Argentine Government had been collaborating actively in the many tasks being 
carried out in connection with the application of those instruments. Completion of most of 
the quadripartite agreement's initial application phase had involved various activities, 
including the inspection of 18 Brazilian and 19 Argentine facilities and communication of the 
required reports to the Agency. In addition, on 18 January 1994 the Argentine Government 
had officially deposited with the Mexican Government its instrument of ratification of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, together with a waiver of the requirements laid down in Article 28 on 
entry into force. The Tlatelolco Treaty was thus in force for Argentina since that date. 

70. In 1994 Argentina had become a full member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group and 
joined the dual-use control regime established by the Group. It had duly participated in the 
plenary meetings held in April in Madrid, at which important decisions had been taken on 
strengthening national systems for controlling exports of sensitive materials. 
71. In line with its consistent support for the Secretariat's efforts to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards system through Programme 93+2, the Argentine Government had 
collaborated fully in field trials carried out in April and May at the Pilcaniyeu enrichment 
plant for the purpose of determining the potential of environmental monitoring techniques as 
a means of detecting the existence of undeclared nuclear activities. Also in April, at 
Bariloche, the Argentine Government had, together with Brazil and the United States, 
organized a seminar on peaceful applications of nuclear energy and non-proliferation; the 
seminar, the first of its kind to be held in Latin America, had been attended by participants 
from 18 American countries and four international organizations (ABACC, the Agency, 
EURATOM and OPANAL), and its success should pave the way for further such meetings 
in countries of the American continent. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 23 

72. Since 1989 his Government had been carrying out important economic reforms and 
had privatized State enterprises in extremely diverse areas, including the production, 
transport and distribution of electricity. Following thermal and hydroelectric power plants, 
it had been decided in 1994 to privatize the nuclear power industry and bring together all of 
the country's energy-related activities under a single body, the Department of Energy. 
73. In order to make a clear distinction between electricity production on one hand and 
R&D and training on the other, his Government had reorganized the nuclear industry by 
means of Decree 1540 of 30 August 1994, which established several organizations. The 
National Nuclear Regulatory Authority, an independent body reporting direct to the President 
of the Republic, had the task of proposing regulatory guidelines to the Government for 
application in all areas connected with radiological and nuclear safety, the physical protection 
of nuclear materials and the supervision of their use, the licensing of facilities, and 
international safeguards. The Argentine Nuclear Power Company, reporting to the 
Department of Energy, was responsible for electricity production at nuclear power plants. 
It would also be responsible for compliance with all the safeguards obligations entered into 
by Argentina and would assume the civil liability of the operator under the Vienna 
Convention. The National Atomic Energy Commission, reporting direct to the President of 
the Republic, was responsible for R&D and for activities associated with the fuel cycle, the 
decommissioning of facilities, radioactive waste management and the production of 
radioisotopes and heavy water. It was required to formulate short-, medium- and long-term 
plans for developing the new techniques that would be necessary in order to meet the 
country's future requirements. 
74. Thus, since the previous session of the General Conference nuclear-related activities 
had been proceeding satisfactorily in Argentina. As regards nuclear power production, the 
plants in operation, with a load (and availability) factor of 96.98 %, had accounted for 15.1 % 
of the country's electricity supplies. Construction of the Atucha n plant has been 87.6% 
complete by the end of June, and its connection to the grid was planned for 1997. On 
9 September, the Arroyito heavy water plant, which had a design capacity of 
250 tonnes/year, had started producing the "primary grade" (99.89%) water essential to the 
operation of natural-uranium heavy-water reactors. On 17 June, the inauguration had taken 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 24 

place of the Ezeiza Atomic Energy Centre, which was equipped with a cyclotron for 
producing radioisotopes with short and medium half-lives; commercial production would 
begin before the end of the year, to the benefit of the health and well-being of the population. 
Lastly, on 29 July, a contract had been concluded with the Province of Tucuman for the 
construction of the country's first sewage sludge irradiation plant. 

75. Turning to the Agency's activities, he emphasized the central role of the Agency in 
the implementation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and of Security Council decisions, 
as clearly demonstrated by the recent cases of Iraq and the DPRK. In that context, he 
recalled the Argentine President's announcement in December 1993 that the Government had 
decided to accede to the NPT, an initiative which, in accordance with Argentine law, had 
been submitted to the National Congress and would, it was hoped, soon be passed on to the 
Senate. The Government expected to be able to announce its accession to the NPT before 
the 1995 Conference. 
76. In that connection, he said that Argentina strongly favoured an indefinite extension 
of the NPT, which, together with the Agency's safeguards system, constituted a main pillar 
in the non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. Also, he drew attention to the 
historic role of START-I and START-H, which had initiated an unprecedented process of 
nuclear disarmament at the international level and which Argentina regarded as decisive steps 
towards the ultimate objective - the elimination of all nuclear weapons. With regard to the 
drafting of a comprehensive test ban treaty and of a convention on the cut-off of the 
production of plutonium and enriched uranium for military purposes, his delegation 
considered that the efforts to overcome the obstacles involved should be intensified, so that 
those international instruments might enter fully into force in 1995. 
77. As to his Government's relations with the Agency, there had been close co-operation 
with the Department of Technical Co-operation, particularly regarding a model project on 
fruit fly eradication by means of the sterile-insect technique and in the context of ARCAL, 
with the result that Argentina was now fifth on the list of the Agency's donor States. In 
support of Agency technical co-operation activities, Argentina had paid its 1994 voluntary 
contribution to the TACF in a timely manner and would be pledging a 1995 contribution of 
$300 000 - an amount which it hoped to pay soon. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 25 

78. Turning to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, he announced that the Argentine 
Minister of Foreign Affairs would sign it in October 1994, on the occasion of a visit by the 
Argentine President to Austria. The signing of the Convention would mark the culmination 
of Argentina's active participation in the negotiation process. Lastly, Argentina hoped that 
the work of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, which was considering 
amendments to the Vienna Convention and the possibility of adopting a convention on 
supplementary funding, would progress smoothly. 
Mr. Marschik (Austria') took the Chair. 

79. Mr. WALKER (Canada) said the fact that the Agency was considered to be 
one of the most efficient of the United Nations organizations, as confirmed by the Geneva 
Group earlier in the year, was due not only to its staff and administration but also to the 
commitment and efforts of many Member States. Good management was particularly 
important at a time when increasing demands might be placed on the Agency. 
80. Canada strongly favoured an indefinite and unconditional extension of the NPT, the 
only guard against the proliferation of nuclear weapons and the only protector of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. In that context, the challenge to the integrity of the safeguards 
system presented by the DPRK had been one of the most serious developments of the past 
year. The response of the Agency - which Canada strongly supported - and that of the 
international community reflected a collective determination to meet that challenge and 
demonstrated the strength of an effective international system. The prospects for resolving 
the issue now seemed encouraging, and Canada hoped that the DPRK would resume its status 
as a full party to the NPT and abide fully by its safeguards agreement. The smuggling of 
fissile material was a new potentially disquieting challenge. Member States were responsible 
for ensuring the adequate physical protection of nuclear material, but the Agency had a role 
to play in that area. Canada, which welcomed the Director General's suggestions regarding 
the issue, supported the establishment of a working group to examine the various options, 
including the possibility of an international register of fissile material. 
81. For Canada, the three main areas of Agency activity were safeguards, safety and 
technology transfer. As regards safeguards, to which his country attached high priority, his 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 26 

delegation welcomed the fact that the number of parties to the NPT was still growing and 
would like to see universal adherence to the NPT. He urged those countries which had 
acceded to the NPT but not yet concluded an NPT safeguards agreement with the Agency 
to do so soon, even if their nuclear programmes were small. If all States party to the NPT 
were on the point of concluding or had already concluded an NPT safeguards agreement by 
the time of the 1995 NPT Conference, that would constitute a strong signal. The States 
concerned and the Agency should work closely together in that important endeavour, which 
should not prove too exacting. 

82. In recent years, the safeguards system had been subjected to significant challenges, 
which had been confronted in a cont> .uctive manner. Canada strongly supported 
Programme 93+2, the aim of which was to strengthen the safeguards system, increase its 
cost-effectiveness and demonstrate that the system was the most effective means of detecting 
violations of safeguards obligations. An important aspect of the programme concerned the 
detection of undeclared nuclear material and activities, and in order to demonstrate its 
commitment to the programme Canada was undertaking field trials of various detection 
approaches. A further aim of Programme 93+2 was to increase cost-effectiveness and 
promote the use of the most efficient methods and techniques in achieving safeguards 
objectives. However, efforts to save on resources should not be allowed to jeopardize the 
safeguards system's overall effectiveness and integrity. Programme 93+2 was very 
extensive, covering legal and policy issues as well as technical ones. While Canada expected 
considerable progress to have been made by the spring of 1995, it considered that an 
artificial deadline for completion of the programme should not be imposed. 
83. Turning to the second main area of Agency activity, nuclear safety, he said that the 
Agency was the principal international forum for exchanging information on safety and 
commended the Agency for the effective manner in which it had taken on that major 
responsibility. Canadian experts had been making contributions at a large variety of safetyrelated 
meetings. Canada continued to support the joint efforts to achieve a high level of 
safety in the construction and operation of nuclear power plants, particularly the extensive 
international co-operation that had developed in order to assist with the assessment and 
implementation of safety improvements at early Soviet-designed nuclear power plants. There 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 27 

was still much work to be done, and his delegation hoped the Agency would continue to 
provide opportunities for collaboration among experts in that vitally important area. 

84. During the current session of the General Conference, Canada and many other 
Member States would sign the Convention on Nuclear Safety. It was appropriate to applaud 
the work of those who had prepared the Convention and commend the contribution of the 
Expert Group, which Canada had had the honour to chair. Canada called on all Member 
States to express their commitment to nuclear safety by signing the Convention. Together, 
countries could achieve and maintain a high level of nuclear safety worldwide. The concern 
for safety had not been overlooked during the Technical Co-operation Policy Review 
Seminar, where safety issues had been discussed in addition to medium-term country 
planning and the impact of technical co-operation projects, and the interdependent nature of 
the Agency's main activities had been underlined. As regards another important issue, 
radioactive waste, his delegation supported the development of an international convention 
on the safety of radioactive waste management once broad international agreement had been 
reached on the Safety Fundamentals document being prepared. Canada considered that the 
latest version of that document should be approved at the Board's meetings in December and 
hoped that the process would not suffer any further delay. 
85. The third main area of Agency activity was technology transfer, in which Canada took 
a keen interest. The great diversity of activities and the large number of beneficiaries of the 
technical co-operation programme testified to the benefits of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy and to the value of an international organization which provided a structure 
for bringing together and sharing technical expertise for the benefit of all. Thus, Canada was 
involved in the provision of technology and expertise for a project on the economical 
production of potable water. The management of the technical assistance and co-operation 
programme was fundamental to its success, and his delegation was pleased with the manner 
in which the Agency had responded so far to the administrative challenges confronting the 
programme. The launching of model projects was a timely response to the need to maximize 
available resources. As the External Auditor had stated in his recommendations, such an 
approach could provide an effective management tool, not only for ensuring that technical 
assistance activities were implemented efficiently, but also for responding to concerns about 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 28 

the sustainability of projects and their relevance to the recipients' capabilities and 
development priorities. In that regard, the Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar 
had produced some useful recommendations. 

86. In conclusion, he wished to address a problem of paramount importance - that of 
financial resources. As many Member States - including Canada - were obliged to follow 
a policy of zero real growth, the problem would remain for some time to come. It might 
even be compounded by the increasing demands being placed on the Agency. In such 
circumstances, it was becoming essential to examine the regular programme carefully with 
a view to determining priorities. The choices would be difficult, and greater stringency 
would be required as to the manner in whk \ they were made. The reallocation of resources 
to emerging higher-priority areas and the introduction of an Agency-wide performance 
assessment system were steps in the right direction. It was important to maintain that 
momentum and to begin establishing a basis for the allocation of resources among and within 
programmes. The Medium Term Plan could also prove very useful in the determination of 
priorities. Member States would then have an opportunity to adjust the Agency's activities 
more closely to changing conditions and ensure that the allocation of resources best met their 
interests. 
87. Mr. GANTAR (Slovenia) said that the past year had seen positive 
developments as regards the non-proliferation regime and the associated safeguards system. 
The NPT Review and Extension Conference, due to take place in 1995, would provide a 
unique opportunity to extend the NPT indefinitely. Progress had also been made in the 
safeguards field - for example, with regard to Iraq and to the establishment of nuclearweapon-
free zones in some regions. Unfortunately, there was less room for optimism about 
the negotiations between the Agency and the DPRK on the question of full access for Agency 
inspectors. Slovenia would continue to support the implementation of the relevant Security 
Council and Agency resolutions. 
88. Confirming his country's commitment to the NPT, he said that by the end of the year 
Slovenia would probably have concluded with the Agency a safeguards agreement which had 
been approved by the Board of Governors in June and was based on the standard text for 
such agreements. The Slovenian delegation attached great importance to that agreement and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 29 

to the safeguards system, a key element of the non-proliferation regime whose effectiveness 
and efficiency needed to be enhanced through a wide range of measures. Slovenia welcomed 
SAGSI's examination of safeguards implementation and proposals for an alternative 
safeguards regime. Measures for detecting undeclared activities, as proposed by SAGSI, 
were necessary in order to increase confidence and cost-efficiency. A comprehensive system 
for reporting exports and imports of nuclear materials and equipment was already being 
implemented. 

89. With regard to the other main functions of the Agency, his country appreciated the 
Agency's activities in the field of nuclear safety - particularly international review mission 
programmes such as OSART, ASSET, ASCOT, IPERS and INSARR, which regularly 
demonstrated the transparency of Slovenia's nuclear activities. With regard to the Nuclear 
Safety Convention, the Director General and the Group of Experts and its Chairman were 
to be thanked for their efforts and their professional approach. Slovenia was honoured to be 
among the first Member States to sign the Convention, and his delegation was pleased to note 
that a large number of Member States had signed it on the first day, ensuring its entry into 
force in the very near future. 
90. The international nuclear third-party liability regime needed to be improved. 
Although an effective and generally acceptable liability regime was hard to achieve, the fact 
that five years had already passed since the Board of Governors had established the Standing 
Committee to revise the Vienna Convention and prepare a draft supplementary funding 
convention could not be overlooked. Slovenia was firmly convinced that the work of the 
Standing Committee should be intensified and hoped that a diplomatic conference would be 
convened soon. With regard to the various options discussed by the Standing Committee, 
Slovenia's position was that besides operators' liability and State funding, the universal 
liability regime should include an international funding tier. Slovenia, as a party to the 
Vienna Convention, would accede to the Joint Protocol by the end of 1994. 
91. The Slovenian delegation was satisfied with the International Basic Safety Standards 
for Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources (BSS) 
adopted by the Board of Governors the previous week, and it commended the work done 
both by the Agency in preparing the new version of the BSS and by the other co-sponsors. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 30 

92. Slovenia attached great importance to the Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
(RADWASS) programme, particularly as one of its main future tasks would be to develop 
environmentally sound procedures for the disposal of radioactive waste. His delegation 
hoped that the documents developed under that programme would be directly applicable to 
Slovenia's normative activities and supported the idea of a convention on the safety of waste 
management. 
93. Emphasizing Slovenia's commitment to the Agency, which had succeeded in finding 
a good balance among its various activities, he said that his country firmly supported the 
technical assistance programme and thanked the Agency for all the assistance it had given 
to Slovenia. Also, Slovenia appreciated the Agency's important role in assessing the safety 
of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union and in helping to 
make them safer. 
94. Lastly, he underlined the threat posed by illicit trafficking in radioactive materials. 
The international community should do everything possible to prevent such trafficking. 
Unless it did so, international efforts to improve the safeguards system would lack a 
substantial element necessary for the public acceptance of nuclear power. 
95. Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland) expressed the hope that the NPT would 
be extended in such a way that its vital beneficial impact on world security and stability and 
on the growth of international co-operation in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy 
became permanent. There were now real prospects that its impact would be enhanced by farreaching 
reductions in nuclear weapons arsenals, a comprehensive ban on nuclear weapons 
testing, a cut-off of the production of weapons-grade nuclear material, and binding security 
assurances for non-nuclear-weapon States parties to the NPT. Verification would necessarily 
become a major task under the new arms control and disarmament arrangements. The role 
and experience of the Agency in the context of the NPT made it particularly well suited to 
undertake that task. In that regard, the Polish delegation welcomed the ideas which the 
Director General had presented to the General Conference and agreed with the steps taken 
and planned by the Agency for strengthening the effectiveness and efficiency of the 
safeguards system. Also, his country was especially pleased that one of its neighbours Ukraine 
- had recently concluded a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 31 

96. The accidents at Three Mile Island and - especially - Chernobyl were still very 
present in people's minds, and there remained the fundamental question whether nuclear 
power was more or less dangerous to the environment than options based on hydrocarbons. 
In several countries, the dilemma had led to critical reviews and to the freezing of nuclear 
power programmes. There was therefore a growing need for Agency action in stimulating 
and facilitating international consideration of the merits and demerits of different energy 
options, including nuclear power. The Agency conference on the nuclear power option 
earlier in the month had been a good example of such action. Methods for comparing the 
economic viability of different options - and particularly the economic consequences of their 
impact on the environment - needed to be further improved and their application promoted. 
Concern about nuclear safety and long-term radioactive waste management appeared to be 
the main factors behind the negative public attitude towards nuclear power. 
97. The Agency deserved to be commended on three important counts. The first was the 
adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the result of more than 20 years' work by the 
Agency on internationally agreed safety standards related to nuclear power plants; his 
country, which had signed the Convention that day, hoped that it would enter into force soon 
and that its scope would be extended. The second was the adoption by the Board, the 
previous week, of new international basic radiation safety standards containing several 
important new guidelines of practical value for national regulatory bodies. The third was the 
considerable progress achieved with regard to the Agency's Radioactive Waste Safety 
Standards, and especially to the elaboration of a Safety Fundamentals document. The Polish 
delegation would have liked to see a more clearly stated obligation on the part of countries 
to ensure the legal and physical protection of records identifying the location and inventory 
of every radioactive waste disposal facility, so that there was continuity of knowledge over 
an extended period of time. He hoped that adoption of the Safety Fundamentals by the Board 
in December would enable the Agency to start preparations, the following year, for a 
radioactive waste management safety convention. Poland supported the Agency's work on 
the safe management of spent fuel from research reactors, given the growing scale of the 
problem in many countries. His delegation had noted with satisfaction the Director General's 
comments relating to improvements in the safety of the different generations of WWER and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 32 

RBMK plants in countries of Central and Eastern Europe and to the consensus on priorities 
for further improvements and on guidance for both national and international assistance 
efforts. 

98. With regard to the problem of trafficking in nuclear material, his delegation believed 
there should first be a critical examination of the existing international legal instruments and 
a study of the practical measures which might be taken at the international level, including 
the provision of assistance to Member States in their endeavours to make their national 
preventive mechanisms sufficiently effective. 
99. On the occasion of the thirtieth anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division, he 
expressed his country's strong support for an institution from which Polish agricultural 
institutes and universities had derived great benefit, particularly with regard to applications 
of nuclear techniques in plant breeding, soil science and animal production. In recognition 
of the importance and quality of the work done by the Division in human resources 
development, the Polish Government had assisted in upgrading the agricultural research 
facilities at the Agency's Seibersdorf Laboratory and had agreed to host the third training 
course on plant breeding at the University of Katowice. 
100. The model project concerning an industrial-scale demonstration facility for the 
electron beam treatment of flue gases, to be established in Poland, was a good example of 
the ecological orientation of the Agency's activities and would be of great importance not 
only for Poland but also for the entire Baltic region. His delegation appreciated the 
continuous attention and support which the project was receiving from the Department of 
Technical Co-operation, the Director General and other leading officials of the Agency. 
While the major part of the project costs was being covered by Poland and the Agency, his 
delegation continued to hope for significant additional contributions by States that had 
declared their interest in the project. 
101. Mr. MIELNICKI (Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 
(TUIWE)), noting that by its very nature TUIWE did not have the same point of view as 
governments regarding the development and utilization of nuclear power, said that TUIWE 
was concerned mainly with the future of nuclear technology, particularly its use for peaceful 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 33 

purposes, and with the safety and working conditions of personnel at nuclear power stations. 
Regarding the management of nuclear activities in the world at large, he would like to 
address three problems which he considered to be essential. 

102. The first problem concerned the future of nuclear power and the improvement of 
work safety at nuclear power stations. At present, and especially in Asia, a continued 
"forced march" towards nuclearization of the energy sector was under way, and it was 
envisaged that electricity production by nuclear power stations would have trebled by the 
year 2010 - in response to people's expectations of universal access to energy under 
environmental conditions that guaranteed the planet's safety. The rush for economic 
development demanded sacrifices, however, and there was now hardly ever any talk of the 
dangers involved; Three Mile Island and Chernobyl had become once again just the names 
of places. That was why, in the view of TUIWE, it was necessary to continuously improve 
the techniques employed at nuclear power stations, particularly in Central and Eastern 
Europe, where the stations required special monitoring and preventive measures. In nuclear 
policy there could be no place for economic egotism or political ambitions. The situation 
regarding nuclear power was paradoxical: nuclear power was the cleanest energy source, 
but its development raised the problem of nuclear wastes. That complex problem, which 
could not be mastered through international controls, required that a stand be taken at the 
international level concerning those who produced nuclear wastes and those who were 
responsible for their disposal. 
103. The second problem was that of privatization in the energy sector. Nuclear power 
was international in nature, and its safety could not be the affair of a single State or region. 
Furthermore, some governments considered that nuclear power could be the subject of free 
competition within a free-market economy. As far as TUIWE was concerned, energy was 
a key element in the development of every country, offering the possibility of meeting 
collective and social needs. Being a strategic sector both nationally and globally, nuclear 
power generation must not be a matter for private enterprises committed to competition; it 
must come within the purview of States, which alone were in a position to guarantee its 
development and safety. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.4 
page 34 

104. The third problem concerned the human factor, which was of very great importance 
in the nuclear sector; the qualifications and knowledge necessary for applying safety 
standards required special efforts and the assistance of the State. In that connection, he said 
that disquieting information had been received about the social situation at Bilibin and Kursk 
in the Russian Federation. 
105. In conclusion, he said that TUIWE intended to support the development of nuclear 
power and the activities of the Agency, counting on the good sense of legislators and 
governments, but conscious that it was difficult to guarantee nuclear safety in the face of 
political ambitions and economic egotism. That was why TUIWE was continuing with its 
work related to monitoring and surveillance mechanisms and to the exercise of 
responsibilities. It was operating an open information policy and hoped that the Agency 
would help it scientifically and financially with the organization of seminars and conferences 
on nuclear safety. 
The meeting rose at 6 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
15 December 1994 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
Original: ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1994, at 10.15 a.m. 


President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1993 (continued) 1 - 152 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Venezuela 1-10 
Morocco 11-24 
Sudan 25 - 29 
Holy See 30 - 33 
Switzerland 34 - 44 
Austria 45-56 
Bulgaria 57 - 72 
Brazil 73 - 87 
Australia 88 - 109 
Nigeria 110 - 126 
Spain 127 - 143 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and 
Control of Nuclear Materials 144 - 152 

[*] GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 I/Rev.2. 

94-03838 (X) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 2 

ABACC 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASCOT 
ASSET 
CIS 
DPRK 
EBRD 
EURATOM 
FAO 
ICRP 
INES 
IRRT 
Joint Division 

MOX 
NPT 
OAU 
OSART 
PHARE 
RADWASS 
RAPAT 
Rarotonga Treaty 
RBMK 
RCA 

SAGSI 
SIT 
TACC 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

Vienna Convention 
WAMAP 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Assessment of Safety Culture in Organizations Team 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
International Commission on Radiological Protection 
International Nuclear Event Scale 
International Regulatory Review Team 
Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and 
Agriculture 
Mixed oxide 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Organization of African Unity 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Poland, Hungary: assistance for economic reconstruction 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Sterile insect technique 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1961) 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(continued) 

1. Mr. OCHOA ANTICH (Venezuela) said that his country had always supported 
the Agency's activities, particularly those relating to technical assistance, as they contributed 
to socio-economic growth in the developing countries, thus helping to maintain international 
peace and security. 
2. Venezuela attached great importance to the technical co-operation it received from the 
Agency, which had led to considerable progress in the use of nuclear techniques and isotopes 
in priority areas such as health, agriculture and stock-breeding, radiation protection, industry 
and the environment. Some problems remained which required appropriate and effective cooperation 
from the Agency. 
3. He reaffirmed his country's support for ARCAL and thanked the Agency for its 
contribution to that regional co-operative effort, which was a valuable instrument for the 
application of nuclear techniques in the fields of agriculture, medicine, industry, research and 
teaching. He urged the Agency to continue its efforts to provide financial resources for 
ARCAL projects and he welcomed the support provided by countries and institutions outside 
the region. 
4. As a party to the NPT, his country paid special attention to the Agency's safeguards 
system, which had helped to prevent the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons. The 
non-implementation of the safeguards agreement between the DPRK and the Agency was 
very disturbing. If no definitive solution could be found, that situation would have to be 
taken into account at the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, which would consider measures 
for establishing a truly universal non-proliferation regime. 
5. He congratulated the Governments of Argentina, Brazil and Chile for their accession 
to the Tlatelolco Treaty and the Cuban Government for its intention to do so. The 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in one of the most densely populated areas of 
the world, Latin America and the Caribbean, set a precedent for the NPT regime. 
6. The Secretariat had made commendable progress in developing Programme 93+2, 
in which new ways were being sought to reduce safeguards implementation costs while 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 4 

maintaining their full effectiveness. It was important to have a suitable and comprehensive 
framework to cover the technical, financial, legal and political implications of the proposals 
to be presented by the Secretariat for possible adoption by the Board of Governors at its 
March 1995 meeting. 

7. The Agency's nuclear safety and radiation protection activities were of benefit to all 
of humanity. However, activities directly connected with reactor safety should be financed 
from extrabudgetary funds so as to make more financial resources available for improving 
the safety of nuclear applications in medicine, agriculture, industry and research and for 
strengthening radiation protection infrastructures in the developing countries. 
8. The meetings of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage had 
discussed in depth many important aspects of civil liability. Nevertheless, some aspects 
required further consideration in order to ensure fair and equitable reparation for victims of 
a nuclear accident. 
9. His Government supported the development of internationally acceptable safety 
fundamentals, standards and guides which would ensure the safe use of nuclear techniques. 
The Nuclear Safety Convention would be a useful instrument for regulating international 
conduct. Liability and ultimate authority lay in each State, but the Agency could play a 
valuable consultative role in that area. 
10. He commended the Secretariat on its efforts to increase the percentage of posts 
occupied by nationals of developing countries, in particular at the higher levels, in the 
Agency's various Departments. However, the representation of women, particularly from 
developing countries, was still in need of further improvement. 
11. Mr. EL FASSI (Morocco), emphasizing the importance which his country 
attached to non-proliferation, said he looked forward to the Agency's valuable contribution 
to the success of the forthcoming NPT Extension Conference. The strengthening of the 
Agency's safeguards system and the widening of its scope of application were essential for 
the creation of a climate of international confidence. In that context, the efforts made by the 
African countries to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone on their continent clearly reflected 
those countries' irreversible attachment to the principle of non-proliferation. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 5 

12. His delegation welcomed the recent positive changes in the Middle East and believed 
that there was a real chance, given the application of safeguards, to establish a zone free of 
nuclear weapons there, too. Efforts should continue with a view to achieving long-term 
peace and stability in that region. 
13. The question of illicit trafficking in radioactive material was a serious cause for 
concern throughout the international community. Morocco strongly supported all measures 
which might be taken to face that challenge, and indeed welcomed generally the Agency's 
work in the field of physical protection of fissionable material 
14. The questions of nuclear safety, radiation protection, radioactive waste management, 
and environmental protection continued to give rise to concerns around the world. The 
further development of nuclear energy was virtually contingent upon the complete mastery 
of safety and waste management problems, and international co-operation was absolutely 
essential in those areas. 
15. The Agency had done excellent work in drafting and opening for signature the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, which reflected the global desire to develop an international 
safety regime. 
16. At a regional level, major successes had been achieved under AFRA despite financial 
difficulties and constraints, and had made the countries of the region aware of available local 
potential and infrastructure and of the benefits to be derived from regional collaboration in 
the pursuit of common goals. Although AFRA projects had high priority, funds were still 
required for their implementation, and support from Member States would therefore be most 
desirable. In that context, the conclusions and recommendations of the AFRA co-ordination 
meeting hosted by Morocco in April 1994 had indicated a willingness to strengthen regional 
ties and opened up new perspectives for development and co-operation. 
17. As part of the effort to consolidate its nuclear infrastructure, Morocco was continuing 
work on the nuclear research centre, which was to play a decisive role in training, research, 
radioisotope production, radioactive waste management and, more generally, in the 
development and promotion of nuclear techniques on a national scale. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 6 

18. Construction work was in progress on the national radiation protection centre, which 
would monitor the application of radiation protection regulations and engage in training and 
research activities, and university laboratories for teaching and scientific research in the field 
of nuclear technology were also being established and developed. 
19. In the agricultural sphere, Morocco was interested in the technology of food 
irradiation and was setting up a pilot installation with a view to the gradual introduction of 
commercial-scale operations. 
20. Parallel to those developments, the recently created National Nuclear Energy Council 
had the task of co-ordinating the development of nuclear techniques in the light of national 
priorities. Basic regulatory texts which took full account of Morocco's international 
commitments had been elaborated. The text concerning the licensing and control of nuclear 
installations had already been approved by the National Nuclear Energy Council, while the 
text on protection against ionizing radiation was in the process of approval. 
21. There had been a shift in his country's policy of diversifying energy sources towards 
encouraging new technologies and allowing private electricity generation on a concession 
basis. The nuclear option stood to benefit from that shift. Siting and feasibility studies for 
a nuclear power plant, initiated several years previously, were nearing completion, and the 
results would be used in determining the role of nuclear power within the national energy 
production system. 
22. Such progress would not have been possible without the Agency's support, and he 
congratulated the Agency on its efforts to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and 
enhance their contribution to the socio-economic development of Member States. 
23. The Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar held the previous week had 
demonstrated the Agency's resolve to improve the quality of its technical co-operation 
programme, and he was convinced that Morocco's achievements in the nuclear energy sector 
could only benefit from any new approaches adopted. 
24. In conclusion, on the occasion of the 30th anniversary of the Joint Division, he paid 
tribute to the fruitful co-operation between FAO and the IAEA in the field of food and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 7 

agriculture, and noted that the scope of the Agency's work and its broad responsibilities 
testified to its positive role in promoting and safeguarding the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 

25. Mr. OMAR (Sudan) said that he hardly needed to remind the present assembly 
of scientists, politicians and executives of the rapid pace of development in science and 
technology, or of the importance of nuclear power and its applications, which were changing 
the face of the modern world. The institutions which managed those scientific developments 
naturally played an essential role, and his country considered the Agency to be the foremost 
among those institutions in view of the progress and well-being which were the result of its 
fruitful activities in the various areas of application of nuclear energy. 
26. Sudan wished to express its appreciation for the assistance provided by the Agency. 
In the medical field, the Agency had helped to establish radiological diagnostic and 
therapeutic services. In the field of agriculture, laboratories had been set up for research in 
pedology and on pesticide residues- Assistance had been provided in the diagnosis of animal 
diseases, and also for animal feeding and reproduction. There had been assistance with 
water supplies, for the identification of underground water sources and the estimation of their 
volume. Other fields covered included environmental monitoring, radiation protection of 
workers, food controls, equipment maintenance and training of local manpower. The 
assistance received, while not overwhelming in terms of quantity or funding, was certainly 
of great value. 
27. Turning to the continent of Africa as a whole, which was not a nuclear continent, he 
said that AFRA provided a basis for co-operation within Africa and with other regions. All 
of the scientific activities that had taken place in the previous year under AFRA had been 
praiseworthy. Thanks to the Agency's co-operation, the financial problems of the first phase 
had been successfully overcome. He also expressed appreciation to the Governments of 
France and Spain for their assistance with various projects. The number and scope of 
projects listed in the 1995-96 programme demonstrated the extent of co-operation with 
Africa, for which increased funding from the TACF had been proposed. He took the 
opportunity to announce that Sudan would be participating in AFRA for the next five years. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 8 

28. His country would welcome an increase in the Agency's technical support both for 
itself and for Africa as a whole. Technical assistance was of vital importance for the 
developing countries in general and for the least developed countries among them in 
particular. Although the Agency was giving priority to its new obligations, that vital 
importance should receive clearer recognition. 
29. On the previous day, Sudan had signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety. It would 
like Africa to remain a zone free of all nuclear weapons. The Middle East had already been 
proclaimed a nuclear-weapon-free-zone. However, despite all the efforts made to ensure that 
all countries in the region were actually applying the safeguards system and had signed the 
NPT, Israel was still openly refusing to sign the NPT and refusing to place its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards. Questions had to be asked about the relevance of 
international criteria, and whether international relations were not based on double standards. 
He hoped that the countries which were working for the future of mankind and which had 
close relations with the State of Israel would bring their influence to bear on that country and 
help the Agency to implement the General Conference resolutions relating to the application 
of the safeguards system in the Middle East. That would be a first step towards achieving 
peace, not only in that region but worldwide. 
30. Mr. ZENARI (Holy See) said that the Holy See, had always striven to be 
objective as far as the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was concerned. However, 
some of its statements dealing with the principles of the utilization of natural forces to aid 
the progress and development of mankind and the relevance of the application of nuclear 
techniques for peaceful purposes had occasionally been heavily criticized. Although many 
people still seemed to focus on the use of nuclear energy for military purposes and the 
imminent danger of major accidents, it should be recalled that the Agency had in fact been 
created with the sole aim of developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that 
enormous progress had been achieved through nuclear research in practically all fields, not 
only in the field of energy supply, but also in agriculture, hydrology, medicine and many 
others. 
31. It should also be noted when making comparisons, that the methods used to detect and 
analyse radioactive substances in the environment were much more accurate and sensitive 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 9 

than the controls carried out in connection with many other industrial activities that were 
dangerous and contributed to air, water and soil pollution. 

32. His delegation welcomed with satisfaction the recently concluded Convention on 
Nuclear Safety and supported the adoption of the Basic Safety Standards. While safety was 
the unique responsibility of each State, the Agency could provide advice and assistance to 
improve safety-related activities when requested. 
33. Turning to the Agency's safeguards system, he noted that if required individual States 
give up part of their sovereignty so that the Agency could carry out the necessary inspections 
and controls and provide assurances to the international community that the nuclear material 
present in States which had concluded safeguards agreements with the Agency was being 
used for peaceful purposes. The task entrusted to the Agency and to its Secretariat was 
clearly an indispensable one for the safety and security of mankind. 
34. Mr. von TSCHARNER (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf of the 
delegation of Liechtenstein, welcomed the signing, after somewhat lengthy preliminaries, of 
the Nuclear Safety Convention, an instrument broad in scope which marked the start of a 
new era of international collaboration on the safety of power reactors and which would help 
Member States share their experience in that field. He appealed to all Member States to 
sign the Convention promptly so that it could come into force with a minimum delay, and 
announced his Government's intention to ratify it in short order. 
35. His delegation had also insisted on several occasions on the need for a convention on 
the safety of nuclear waste. Unfortunately, he still saw no progress. The year before, his 
delegation had stressed how important it was to avoid giving the public the impression that 
no agreement could be reached on basic safety principles. While recognizing that serious 
efforts had been made, he once again urged that work on the drafting of a convention on the 
safety of nuclear waste be pursued with all due vigour. 
36. International activities aimed at enhancing the safety of older RBMK reactors had 
continued throughout the year and had brought about substantial improvements in existing 
reactors. Much remained to be done, however, and the Agency should step up its exertions 
in close collaboration with the European Union, the EBRD and the Member States involved. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 10 

His Government continued unreservedly to support those efforts and intended to contribute 
a further 200 000 Swiss francs before the end of the year for the improvement of the safety 
of RBMK reactors. 

37. Turning to the situation in Switzerland, he said that the controversy on nuclear energy 
continued, although questions of energy policy were not currently a priority concern amongst 
the population. As elsewhere, the recession had brought about a momentary reduction in 
electricity consumption and a temporary oversupply. 
38. The most important event of the year in his country had been the final choice of a site 
for the storage of short-lived low-level waste. The body responsible, CEDRA, had signed 
a contract with the municipality concerned covering payments to be made. An organization 
had also been created to manage the facility, but a concession from the canton and the 
authorization of the Federal Parliament still had to be obtained. Construction should be able 
to start before the end of the century, putting an end to almost 15 years of preparatory 
technical and legal work and, above all, political discussion. 
39. His delegation was pleased to note the continued reduction in the number of nuclear 
weapons in the course of the year. One result, however, was that increasing quantities of 
highly enriched plutonium and uranium were becoming available for other purposes. As that 
material represented a major source of energy and as the storage of nuclear warheads 
presented serious risks because of the possibility of proliferation and subsequent re-use for 
non-energy purposes, he saw no reason why that material should not be converted into MOX 
fuel elements for use in civilian nuclear plants subject to Agency safeguards. 
40. Several cases of illegal trafficking in plutonium and other radioactive substances had 
recently been discovered in Europe. It was reassuring to note that the material had not 
apparently been diverted from sources subject to Agency safeguards and was also unlikely 
to have come from military stocks. Although there were sellers, there appeared to be very 
few buyers - apart from journalists. The situation was nevertheless being taken very 
seriously in his country and various precautionary measures had been implemented. In 
particular, no Swiss laboratory would agree to analyse such material on a private commercial 
basis. In view of the potential enormity of the stakes, it was essential that all the countries 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 11 

concerned should make sure that the security systems in their installations containing fissile 
material were in perfect working order, although the main focus should be on stopping the 
traffic at its source. 

41. At an international level, close collaboration between the national control authorities 
and the police was indispensable. In addition, Article 5 of the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material provided for various specific co-operative measures. Should 
traffic in plutonium continue in the long term it might be necessary to review the 
recommendations on physical protection or even replace them by an international convention. 
42. At the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the 1995 NPT Extension 
Conference in New York in January, Agency experts had presented excellent account of the 
political, legal and technical aspects of the Agency's safeguards system and technical cooperation 
programme, once again giving representatives of the States Parties an indication 
of the major role played by the IAEA in various areas covered by the NPT. 
43. Safeguards was one of the most important areas of the Agency's work but while the 
principle of safeguards was generally accepted, its implementation raised a number of 
questions. He congratulated the Director General and his team on their work and 
commended the Agency for launching Programme 93+2 for the reappraisal of safeguards 
in response to SAGSI's very interesting recommendations. In spite of the zero real growth 
budget and the ever increasing number of members, the safeguards system could still be 
improved given imagination in finding new ideas and courage in abandoning traditional ones. 
His country had already formulated specific suggestions for improvements and had 
volunteered for an "any place, any time" inspection trial to test safeguards. 
44. He realized that the Agency did what it could with the resources at its disposal, and 
he did not wish to discuss the total amount available for the financing of safeguards. That 
could be more appropriately examined once Programme 93+2 had been completed. 
Nevertheless, the mechanism for distributing the financial burden of safeguards was a legacy 
of the past which produced grotesque injustices and was no longer acceptable. His 
delegation was willing to participate actively in any attempt to arrive at a reasonable and 
realistic solution, but it felt the time had come for all members of the Agency to 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 12 

acknowledge their shared responsibility for adequate and equitable financing of safeguards 
and to stop hiding behind the status quo, 

45. Mr. MARSCHIK (Austria) said that the DPRK's non-compliance with its 
safeguards obligations, and its failure to respond to resolutions of the Board of Governors 
and the United Nations Security Council represented a serious challenge to the Agency's 
mandate and authority and to the international non-proliferation regime. The Agency, in 
reacting with competence, impartiality and firmness, had lived up to its duties and to his 
country's expectations. The DPRK's decision to withdraw from the Agency was regrettable 
and it was to be hoped that that country would soon see its way to a return to the Agency. 
Meanwhile, Austria appealed to the DPRK to honour its commitments under the NPT and 
under its safeguards agreement. 
46. Nuclear safety had rightly continued to remain one of the focuses of the Agency's 
activities. Eight years after the disaster at Chernobyl, many people were still traumatized 
by that tragic event and fearful of a possible repetition of such a catastrophe. Austria 
appreciated the Agency's work to support the improvement of the safety of older reactors in 
Central and Eastern Europe under an extrabudgetary programme, to which Austria had 
contributed both financially and through the participation of experts. It appealed in particular 
to the Government of Ukraine to implement the recommended measures for the improvement 
of safety. 
47. His delegation welcomed the Nuclear Safety Convention, although it would have 
preferred a broader and more far-reaching convention covering all nuclear installations and 
the entire nuclear fuel cycle that would have corresponded more fully to the preoccupations 
of neighbouring countries and ensured that the Agency played a more comprehensive role 
in its implementation. The present Convention appeared to be the best attainable compromise 
and its early and wide application would undoubtedly be a significant contribution to 
international efforts to improve the safety of nuclear power plants and to guarantee the best 
possible protection of the population and the environment. 
48. Austria had signed the Convention on the understanding that agreements pertaining 
to the other areas of the nuclear fuel cycle would soon follow. It welcomed and strongly 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 13 

supported the decision taken by the Board of Governors the previous week to request the 
Director General to initiate the process for the preparation of a convention on the safety of 
nuclear waste management, pending a decision on the adoption of the revised draft Safety 
Fundamentals entitled "The Principles of Radioactive Waste Management". 

49. Little, if any, progress had so far been made on an improved international regime on 
liability for nuclear damage. As basic differences of view on the revision of the Vienna 
Convention and on its interrelationship with the concept of a proposed supplementary funding 
convention persisted, and as the deliberations of the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage were in their fifth year, the time had perhaps come to embark on radically 
new approaches in the search for a solution to that pressing issue. 
50. Like other countries, Austria was alarmed at the increasing number of illegal transfers 
of nuclear material. It was important that all States should take effective measures as a 
matter of urgency to stop that criminal activity. The initial action already taken by some 
countries to that effect was encouraging. While the main responsibility in that field must, 
of course, remain with national Governments, the Agency should also, within its mandate, 
assist those efforts, and his delegation hoped that the General Conference would take 
appropriate action to deal with the problem of illicit trafficking in nuclear material. 
51. Political developments during the past years had prompted the Agency to re-evaluate 
and, where necessary, adjust its safeguards system. It was very important to strengthen the 
Agency's capability to detect undeclared nuclear activities and Austria was following with 
interest the work in progress on the development and testing of alternative safeguards 
measures, including environmental monitoring and the expanded involvement in verification 
activities of national systems of nuclear accounting and control. 
52. Austria continued to attach the greatest importance to international efforts to stem the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of those efforts. 
It was encouraged by the fact that additional countries had acceded to the Treaty during the 
past year and appealed to those that had still not done so to accede to it in order to make it 
universal. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 14 

53. Austria would support the indefinite and unconditional extension of the Treaty at the 
1995 Extension Conference and welcomed the valuable contribution being made by the 
Agency to the preparation for that Conference. His delegation noted with satisfaction that 
during the past year a number of additional countries had concluded safeguards agreements 
in accordance with Article IQ of the NPT and urged all Parties to the NPT that had not yet 
done so to honour that obligation. 
54. His delegation welcomed the safeguards agreement just approved by the Board of 
Governors with Ukraine, but regretted that it was not yet concluded under the NPT and 
continued to plead for Ukraine's earliest possible accession to the NPT as a non-nuclearweapon 
State. 
55. With only one exception, all nuclear-weapon States were continuing their moratoriums 
on nuclear testing. Austria believed that all States should make every effort to advance the 
negotiations for the early completion of a comprehensive test ban treaty. The success of such 
a treaty would depend to a large extent on the work of the organization entrusted with its 
verification. As such an organization would undoubtedly benefit from close co-operation 
with the Agency, his Government had decided to invite the organization that would be 
responsible for such verification to establish its headquarters in Vienna. 
56. His Government had consistently supported the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and accordingly had paid its share of the 1994 target for the TACF in full and in 
a timely manner, as well as pledging its share of the 1995 target. His delegation had noted 
with great satisfaction the innovative responses to the changing requirements and demands 
of recipient countries, such as the model project approach initiated during the past year, and 
hoped that the input from the recently concluded Third Technical Co-operation Policy Review 
Seminar would provide further guidance to the Secretariat enabling it to meet the challenges 
of the years to come. 
57. Mr. YANEV (Bulgaria) said that the Agency continued to play a vital role in 
maintaining global peace and security by promoting co-operation in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. Bulgaria supported the Agency's efforts to strengthen its safeguards system, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 15 

to improve the scope and effectiveness of its nuclear safety programme, and to serve as a 
major source of technical assistance to Member States. 

58. The recent progress in the field of nuclear disarmament and the increased reliance of 
the United Nations on preventative diplomacy had highlighted widespread concerns about the 
danger of proliferation of nuclear weapons and means of their delivery. The NPT remained 
the cornerstone of the international regime designed to cope with that danger. Technical cooperation 
in the nuclear field should be conditional on accession to and strict compliance with 
the NPT or other binding bilateral or multilateral agreements. In view of the fact that its 
primary responsibility related to the maintenance of international peace and security, the 
United Nations Security Council should become the effective forum for non-proliferation 
enforcement in the new international environment, with the power to sanction States which 
violated the relevant international agreements. 
59. The international community needed effective measures to safeguard weapons-grade 
nuclear material and also to detect and prevent the clandestine production of nuclear 
weapons. The Agency's important role in that respect was well established and should be 
further enhanced. The Agency had to be given all the support it required to strengthen its 
safeguards regime, conduct special inspections and refer unresolved cases of proliferation to 
the Security Council. The actions which the Agency had taken to implement the concept of 
universal reporting of exports and imports of nuclear material, inventories, relevant nuclearrelated 
equipment and other non-nuclear material deserved to be encouraged and developed 
further. 
60. The recent accession of all nuclear-weapons States to the NPT had created a 
favourable political environment for affirming non-proliferation objectives, and served to 
demonstrate the growing international effort to ensure the viability of the Treaty at a crucial 
moment in the history of non-proliferation. He urged other Member States which were not 
yet parties to the Treaty to accede to it, and in that connection looked forward to the early 
accession of Ukraine, Kazakhstan and Belarus, as well as that of the other Republics of the 
former Soviet Union. Furthermore, in order to consolidate the recent promising 
developments regarding the NPT, all the Treaty's provisions - in particular Article VI 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 16 

should be fully implemented, and the process towards a comprehensive nuclear test ban 
should be advanced. 

61. The recent progress in nuclear disarmament was a significant step in implementing 
the NPT. Uninterrupted continuation of that process would greatly facilitate extension of the 
Treaty beyond 1995. Bulgaria favoured this indefinite and unconditional extension, and 
would work towards that goal at the NPT Extension Conference in 1995. 
62. With regard to the recent developments on the DPRK safeguards question, his 
delegation supported the efforts being made by the countries concerned to find a solution to 
the problems. It also supported the Agency's activities in that area, and endorsed the draft 
resolution submitted on the subject. 
63. Bulgaria attached particular importance to the Agency's programmes to develop 
standards for and provide assistance in ensuring nuclear and radiation safety. It was also 
strongly committed to enhancing nuclear safety culture worldwide and had participated 
actively in the elaboration of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. He was pleased to announce 
that Bulgaria had already approved and signed the Convention. 
64. The prevention of a possible nuclear accident was of the highest priority for individual 
States and the international community as a whole. At the same time, it was essential that 
a generally acceptable, predictable and effective liability regime with broad participation be 
established to provide prompt and fair compensation for nuclear damage. He wished to 
inform the Conference that the Bulgarian National Assembly had ratified the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Joint Protocol Relating to the 
Application of the Vienna Convention and the Paris Convention. Universal participation in 
the international liability regime was very important for its success. Therefore he urged all 
States which had not already done so to consider acceding to those two instruments. 
65. Turning to the work of the Standing Committee on Nuclear Liability, he expressed 
the view that an agreement on major issues of principle still had to be reached, in order to 
achieve broad participation in the revised Vienna Convention. Bulgaria was convinced that 
the revision process should not be decoupled from the elaboration of a supplementary funding 
system. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 17 

66. October 1994 marked the completion of 20 years' commercial operation of the first 
reactor of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant. During that period, the plant had produced 
more than 208 billion kW-h of electricity. In 1993, despite the fact that one of the WWER 
units was under reconstruction, Kozloduy had produced a total of 13.897 billion kWh, 
representing 36.48 % of the total power generated in the country. That placed Bulgaria tenth 
in the world in terms of percentage of power produced by nuclear means. 
67. Since 1991, an extensive programme to upgrade WWER-440/230 reactor safety had 
been under way. The programme, partially funded by the European Union under the 
PHARE programme, involved 37 Bulgarian companies and institutes along with more than 
20 companies worldwide. Furthermore, a consortium of regulatory bodies and independent 
organizations from the European Union had been established to advise the Bulgarian 
regulatory body on licensing procedures after upgrading and reconstruction. 
68. Kozloduy nuclear power plant was a unique example of efficient international cooperation 
on safety matters, with the Agency playing an important co-ordinating role. It was 
planned to expand the use of nuclear power in Bulgaria, despite the difficulties involved in 
the transition from a planned to a market economy. 
69. His delegation had studied thoroughly the report on the Agency's technical cooperation 
activities in 1993, contained in document GOV12121, and wished to associate itself 
with others in approving that report, which illustrated the useful work being done by the 
Agency for its Member States. He noted in particular that the new resources available for 
the technical co-operation programme had increased by 31.3% in 1993, while the value of 
the adjusted programme had risen by 16.9%. 
70. During the year Bulgaria had received technical assistance on 13 national projects, 
the bulk of it concerned with safety work at the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in such areas 
as quality assurance, waste handling and instrument calibration. In addition, anti-seismic 
work had been carried out, including equipment anchoring and reinforcement of buildings, 
and assistance had been provided to the national regulatory body. Bulgaria was profoundly 
grateful for all the technical assistance it had received from the Agency, including fellowships 
and scientific visits, although the number of the latter approved of late had gone down. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 18 

71. His country attached great importance to the Agency's regional projects, in which 
Bulgarian specialists had participated, and welcomed the Agency's benchmark study 
programme, which would be of great significance for assessing the seismic reliability of 
WWER-1000 type reactors in Bulgaria. It also supported the Agency's activities on research 
contracts and co-ordination programmes. 
72. Finally, he congratulated the Agency's Secretariat on its efficient and productive work 
during the year, commended the substantial contribution of the Director General, and pledged 
the unreserved support of the Bulgarian Government for the Agency in its task of promoting 
international co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of atomic energy and controlling 
nuclear weapons proliferation. 
73. Ms. MACHADQ OUINTELLA (Brazil) said that despite the end of the Cold 
War, the world was faced with a succession of crises and conflicts, presenting new risks and 
challenges to mankind. Although there had been indisputable progress in the field of nuclear 
non-proliferation, new causes for concern had emerged, the most recent one being illicit 
trafficking in nuclear material. Disarmament, non-proliferation and international security 
were interrelated issues. The existence of nuclear arsenals that were not subject to 
international control and verification constituted a threat to the non-proliferation regime. 
Brazil, therefore, supported the adoption of a comprehensive test ban treaty and a cutoff 
treaty on the production of highly enriched uranium and plutonium. Both treaties would help 
to reduce the risks of vertical and horizontal proliferation and, once they were adopted, there 
should be a significant role for the Agency in their implementation. In view of the cases of 
illicit trade in nuclear material, it would perhaps be advisable for the cutoff treaty not to 
restrict itself to the production of plutonium and highly enriched uranium, but to tackle the 
issue of existing stocks as well. The illicit trafficking in nuclear material was causing great 
concern and her delegation shared the opinion that the Agency's expertise should be used in 
solving the problem. However, the physical protection of nuclear material was primarily a 
national responsibility and any new measures envisaged involving the Agency should not be 
detrimental in any way to the Agency's other activities. 
74. Concerns regarding international security and non-proliferation, no matter how 
legitimate, should not relegate to second place the Agency's main objective of accelerating 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 19 

and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout 
the world. Increasing costs faced by the Agency in the performance of its new functions in 
the areas of disarmament and non-proliferation should not adversely affect promotional 
activities, nor should concerns related to safeguards and control prevent Brazil and other 
developing countries from obtaining access to the advanced technologies required for their 
national development. 

75. Brazil was very concerned about the funding of the Agency's activities and, in 
particular, the decreasing support for the TACF and the high degree of reliance on 
extrabudgetary resources. At a time when so many countries were faced with difficult 
financial situations, it was appropriate that Member States which were in a position to do so 
should make additional contributions. However, promotional activities should benefit from 
such funds as well as regulatory ones, and the acceptance and expenditure of extrabudgetary 
resources should be kept under the control of the Board of Governors. 
76. The promotion of the transfer of sensitive technology for peaceful purposes was 
beneficial to both supplier and recipient States. Universally accepted norms and guidelines 
were urgently needed to regulate such transfers in order to ensure the maintenance of 
international peace and security and access to technology, services and know-how that were 
essential for the economic and social welfare of all nations. 
77. As was well known, the Brazilian Government was developing a comprehensive 
confidence-building strategy based on the adoption of more effective non-proliferation 
measures. Brazil's contribution to nuclear non-proliferation was demonstrated basically by 
three international agreements - the bilateral agreement with Argentina for the Exclusively 
Peaceful Use of Nuclear Energy, the Quadripartite Agreement with the Agency, Argentina 
and ABACC, and the Tlatelolco Treaty, which had entered into force for Brazil in 
May 1994. That development was of great significance for Brazil and for the whole of Latin 
America, since it helped to promote the Treaty's application in the entire region. The 
announcement recently made by the Government of Cuba concerning its decision to accede 
to the Tlatelolco Treaty had also been warmly welcomed in Latin America. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 20 

78. Convinced of the important role that regional measures on disarmament and nonproliferation 
could play in promoting international peace and security, Brazil was following 
with great interest the assistance provided by the Agency to the parties concerned with a view 
to establishing nuclear-weapon-free zones in Africa and the Middle East. 
79. With regard to Iraq, her delegation had taken due note not only of the progress made 
over the past few months in the Agency's activities under the relevant Security Council 
resolutions, but also of the fact that data provided by the Iraqi authorities on foreign sources 
of supply and technical advice had been found to be correct and complete and that the 
Agency's ongoing monitoring and verification activities in Iraq had been implemented on a 
full-time basis since the beginning of the month. 
80. As to the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the 
DPRK, her delegation called again on that country to re-establish full co-operation with the 
Agency. Brazil was paying close attention to current bilateral developments that might help 
solve that question and looked forward to further progress on the matter in the very near 
future. 
81. On the subject of strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the 
safeguards system and Programme 93+2, her delegation was willing to discuss the matter 
once the Secretariat had submitted a comprehensive report to the Board covering all seven 
tasks undertaken in accordance with the Programme. Brazil attached particular importance 
to Task 7 concerning the assessment of all financial and legal implications. 
82. Brazil believed that by contributing to the enhancement of nuclear safety around the 
world, the Convention on Nuclear Safety would also help to increase public confidence in 
the safety of nuclear power and facilitate the promotion of other peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. That Convention was an important first step, but others would have to follow. After 
the Board's approval in December of the Safety Fundamentals relating to waste management, 
it was expected that drafting of a convention on waste management would start. It was 
crucial to secure the widest possible participation of regions and Member States in the 
drafting of such a convention, which should include a provision for assistance to developing 
countries in establishing their waste management infrastructures. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 21 

83. The implementation of the Basic Safety Standards would impose a heavy burden upon 
institutions using ionizing radiation and it was to be hoped that international co-operation 
would not fail where it was needed. 
84. The revision of the international liability regime within the framework of the Standing 
Committee on Nuclear Liability seemed excessively ambitious. One of the main points, the 
amount of compensation, contemplated in Article V of the Vienna Convention was still an 
open question and had been addressed by the Standing Committee only circumstantially. 
However, an exaggerated effort had been made to facilitate acceptance of the global 
mechanism of supplementary funding, an area where consensus had been quite difficult to 
reach. The Brazilian delegation had stressed its strong preference for a solution to the 
question of supplementary funding which would take country characteristics in each region 
into account. The next meeting of the Standing Committee should give greater attention to 
the analysis of the proposal presented by the United States of America, which appeared to 
provide a basis for a possible compromise on the subject involving the co-existence of 
regional and global systems. 
85. In the light of certain political developments and the increase in the Agency's 
membership, questions pertaining to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute had gained 
new impetus. The Brazilian delegation therefore supported the proposed re-establishment of 
the informal working group. The enlargement of the Board and the maintenance of its 
efficiency were not irreconcilable objectives. However, the Agency had fulfilled its 
objectives in a very satisfactory way under the existing Article VI and any revision should 
therefore be considered with great care. 
86. The measures taken by the Director General in response to resolutions 
GC(XXXVII)/RES/621 and 622 on the increase in the number of staff drawn from 
developing countries and the representation of women in the Secretariat were commendable, 
although the percentages of staff members from developing countries in posts subject to 
geographical distribution and of female staff were still unsatisfactory. Of special concern 
was the situation at the higher-level posts of the Secretariat, where nationals of developing 
countries were not found in adequate numbers and there were no women. Developing 
Member States should nominate more candidates, particularly female candidates, and request 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 22 

the Director General to make additional efforts to achieve the goals set by the General 
Conference. 

87. Turning to the Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar, she said that it had 
been very successful. Regarding radiation protection and waste management, Brazil shared 
the Seminar's view that emphasis should switch from technical assistance to technical cooperation, 
which should also be provided by experts from developing countries. With regard 
to the medium-term country plans, it agreed with the Seminar that there was need for 
flexibility in the formulation, framing and approval of such plans. With reference to the 
impact of technical co-operation projects, it endorsed the Seminar's conclusion that socioeconomic 
impact should not be the only element considered and that continuous attention 
should also be given to projects which could contribute to scientific advancement and the 
development of infrastructures. 
88. Mr. WALKER (Australia) said that over the past year the Agency had made 
major and sustained contributions towards the development of a strengthened safeguards 
regime, more effective technical co-operation, and the development of strengthened 
international norms relating to nuclear safety and the physical protection of nuclear material. 
Arms control and disarmament had gathered pace since the Cold War, and there was a 
growing need for the international community to develop effective verification systems in 
new areas. Australia believed the Agency's experience would be invaluable in that regard. 
It was important that the Agency's capacity to contribute to prospective developments - and 
its contribution to international security through preventive diplomacy - should not be 
constrained by inadequate resources. 
89. Australia had long recognized that the assurance of the peaceful use of nuclear 
technology by a State, and the independent verification of that use, were important factors 
in other States' assessments of their own security interests. His country had been a strong 
proponent of efforts over the past three years to strengthen the Agency's safeguards system 
and had actively supported Programme 93+2 to examine the efficiency and effectiveness of 
its safeguards practices. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 23 

90. Australia had been one of the first States to endorse the principle of an extended 
access safeguards regime and had been discussing with the Secretariat the possibility of a 
field trial in Australia. The Secretariat had already commenced field testing there of 
environmental sampling for safeguards purposes. Australia considered that remote 
surveillance systems had considerable potential both for making savings in inspection days 
and increasing safeguards effectiveness, and had developed and demonstrated such a system. 
It was currently participating - with a number of other countries - in a trial of advanced 
United States technology in that area. Australia urged other States to participate in similar 
trials to assist with the development of safeguards. 
91. Recent regional developments clearly demonstrated the benefits of the Agency's 
safeguards system. The African nuclear-weapon-free zone treaty was close to being 
finalized. The countries of South East Asia were considering the development of a similar 
zone in their region. Australia had shared with both regions the experience it had gained in 
negotiating the Rarotonga Treaty. The Tlatelolco Treaty also looked set to enter into force 
soon. 
92. In 1993, the United Nations General Assembly had adopted resolutions calling for 
negotiation of a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty and a convention to prohibit the 
production of fissile material for weapons purposes, known as "cut-off1. Such a convention 
could involve a significant verification role for the Agency. Australia hoped that all Member 
States would acknowledge the Agency's potential contribution to those international cooperative 
efforts and support its involvement in any such verification. 
93. The future of plutonium and highly enriched uranium from nuclear weapons 
programmes, as well as the increasing amounts of plutonium from reprocessing of spent fuel, 
had attracted considerable international attention. Recent instances of illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials had been a further cause for concern. A potential role in that context for 
the Agency was being discussed. He urged Member States to support the Agency once the 
nature of its role had been defined. The Agency also had an important role to play in 
assisting Member States to acquire accountancy and physical protection skills. Member 
States could assist each other; Australia, for its part, had held a course on State systems of 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 24 

accounting and control of nuclear material in May 1994, which had been attended by 
24 participants from 12 countries. 

94. Turning to the implementation of safeguards in the DPRK, he regretted that that 
country had still not complied with its obligations. The issue was not a mere technicality but 
one which bore on the central purpose of any safeguards agreement, which was that the 
country concerned should co-operate with the Agency in demonstrating that all its nuclear 
material remained in peaceful activities. The DPRK's attitude presented a threat to 
international and regional security, and also a challenge to the safeguards system of the 
Agency. There were, however, encouraging signs from the talks currently under way 
between the United States and the DPRK. Australia hoped that the DPRK would respond 
to many calls by the international community to implement fully its obligations under the 
NPT. 
95. Australia was looking forward to the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, which would 
provide an opportunity for thorough review of the benefits the Treaty had brought to 
international security and to co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology. 
96. His country welcomed all recent accessions to the NPT - including that of some States 
with advanced nuclear capabilities - and the news that Algeria and Argentina intended to 
follow suit. It was also gratifying that Ukraine had concluded a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement with the Agency and had re-affirmed its intention to join the NPT as a nonnuclear-
weapon State. His delegation urged Ukraine to take that step in the near future. 
Australia renewed its call for universal membership of the Treaty, a goal which was coming 
more and more within reach as membership had now increased to more than 165 States. 
97. The Nuclear Safety Convention - which had been opened for signature at the current 
session of the General Conference - illustrated the benefits of co-operative approaches to 
common problems. It offered an assurance to other States of the safety of nuclear power 
plants. Australia had already signed the Convention and called on all States, particularly 
those operating or intending to operate nuclear power reactors, to do so at the earliest 
opportunity. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 25 

98. Australia shared international concerns that all nuclear facilities throughout the world 
should operate to stringent safety standards. It urged all States to attach a high priority to 
continued monitoring and necessary upgrading of safety standards in nuclear power plants 
and other nuclear facilities. Australia particularly welcomed the Agency's activities to that 
end in the countries of Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. It also urged all States 
to participate constructively in negotiations covering liability for nuclear damage. 
99. His country was pleased with the progress made by the Agency in developing the 
RADWASS and other safety standards documents and felt that a high priority should continue 
to be given to that activity. It looked forward to the commencement of negotiations for a 
radioactive waste management safety convention in 1995 and urged all States to consider the 
benefits of participation. 
100. Australia welcomed the decision of the contracting parties to the London Dumping 
Convention to prohibit the dumping of all types of radioactive waste at sea. As an active 
proponent of such a ban, it was pleased that all but one party had accepted that decision. It 
looked forward to the outcome of the Agency's investigation of past radioactive waste 
dumping in the Arctic Seas and the Sea of Japan. 
101. The Agency' s technical co-operation programme had for many years been a principal 
mechanism for international co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy - in both 
power and non-power applications. The Agency was responding to the changing interests 
and needs of Member States. It had implemented the model project concept to demonstrate 
the tangible benefits of various nuclear techniques. In addition to its established activities 
in the fields of human health, food and agriculture, industry and environmental science, it 
had in recent years formulated new activities in, for example, the fields of insect eradication, 
potable water and food preservation. His delegation endorsed the increasing attention being 
paid to the potential impact of technical co-operation activities on poverty alleviation and the 
environment, and on the needs of women. 
102. The Agency's ability to respond to Member States' interest in the technical cooperation 
programme was constrained by the failure of many Member States to contribute 
in full their share of the TACF target. Australia urged all countries to make full and timely 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 26 

voluntary contributions and, for its part, would again pledge its share of almost 
US $1 million for 1995. In addition, it was providing substantial support to the RCA for 
Asia and the Pacific through an extrabudgetary contribution of 1.5 million Australian dollars 
over the three-year period up to 1995. 

103. Australia had a long-standing commitment to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and to implementation of Article IV of the NPT. It had for many years provided 
expert assistance and training facilities in a range of non-power nuclear applications. It had 
made a number of suggestions at the 1993 TACC meetings, aimed at enhancing the effective 
use of available funding to maximize the impact of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme. 
104. Turning to developments in the nuclear field in Australia over the past year, he said 
that the 9th Pacific Basin Nuclear Conference held in Sydney in May 1994 had been attended 
by representatives from 6 international organizations and 35 countries. The theme of the 
Conference had been nuclear energy, science and technology - Pacific partnership and a 
range of topics had been covered. 
105. Australia was seeking a site for a national repository for low-level and short-lived 
intermediate-level radioactive wastes generated by medical, research and industrial uses of 
radioisotopes. The communities concerned were being closely involved in that process. 
106. A project manager had been selected for the former United Kingdom nuclear weapons 
test site at Maralinga, marking the start of the engineering phase of the Maralinga 
Rehabilitation Project. Work had begun on a detailed engineering design for the project and 
upgrading of the site infrastructure. The project was expected to last five years and his 
Government was keeping the Agency informed of developments. 
107. At the end of 1993, his Government had announced further improvements to the 
nuclear regulation arrangements in Australia. A new Australian Institute for Radiation 
Protection, an amalgamation of the Australia Radiation Laboratory and the Nuclear Safety 
Bureau, would have regulatory and licensing powers for nuclear and radiation activities at 
national facilities. The Government had also decided that the Minister for Foreign Affairs 
would assume portfolio responsibility for the Australian Safeguards Office, which 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 27 

administered Australia's nuclear safeguards obligations arising from the NPT. In due course, 
the expertise of the Australian Safeguards Office would serve as a basis for administering 
Australia's domestic obligations under other arms control treaties such as the Chemical and 
Biological Weapons Conventions. 

108. Australia had been an active proponent of programme and budgetary reform within 
the Agency. While recognizing that it was difficult for Member States to support continuous 
real growth in future Agency budgets in a situation of domestic budgetary restraint, Australia 
felt that the Agency's current level of commitment to existing priority activities must 
continue. His delegation therefore urged all Member States to make full and timely payment 
of their assessed contributions to the Regular Budget. 
109. In conclusion, the increased attention paid in the Annual Report for 1993 to the 
impact of Agency activities would assist Member States in their consideration of the benefits 
of Agency membership. That report was an excellent example of the Secretariat's 
willingness to respond to Member States' requests. 
110. Mr. UMARU BABA (Nigeria) said the achievements outlined in the 
documents before the Conference reflected the qualities of leadership, commitment and vision 
which the Director General had brought to the Agency at a time of immense challenges. As 
a result, respect for the role of the Agency and its highly motivated staff had increased. 
111. That respect was nowhere more evident than in the Agency's promotional activities. 
Since the last session of the General Conference, the Agency had taken bold steps to promote 
nuclear techniques in the areas of agriculture, industry and medicine. He welcomed recent 
progress in the genetic improvement of crops through the combined used of induced 
mutations and other techniques. The proposal to place more emphasis on basic foods would, 
like the Agency's joint efforts with FAO to encourage the use of food irradiation on a 
commercial scale, do much to alleviate food shortages in developing countries. 
112. His country greatly valued the Agency's activities aimed at the transfer of nuclear 
technology, primarily because they could help to strengthen Nigeria's scientific and 
technological base and thus its national economy. Thanks to extrabudgetary resources 
provided by some of its development partners, Nigeria had continued to benefit from the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 28 

Agency's technical assistance programme, and he urged that the current welcome focus in 
that programme be sustained. 

113. In recognition of the importance of technical assistance for development, the Nigerian 
Government, notwithstanding its economic and financial difficulties, had pledged the sum of 
$123 000 as its voluntary contribution to the Agency for 1995. He urged other Member 
States to make similar pledges, and, more important, to fulfil their pledges fully and on time. 
That was essential if the Agency's capability to meet programme costs was not to be 
hampered. 
114. He noted that recent increases in the Agency's activities had been achieved in the face 
of severe resource constraints imposed by the maintenance of zero real growth in the budget, 
as well as by declining contributions to the TACF. The arguments in favour of an increase 
in the Agency's resource base now seemed overwhelming. It needed not only to respond to 
the challenge of its enlarged safeguards functions, but also to meet the concern of developing 
Member States that funding for technical assistance activities be assured. He wished to stress 
that any additional resources received should not be used to the disadvantage of promotional 
activities. 
115. He was pleased to note that prospects for combating and possibly eliminating the 
Mediterranean fruit fly through sterile insect techniques were encouraging, and appealed to 
the Agency and donor countries to assist Nigeria in the completion of its SIT project. 
116. He wished to express thanks to the Agency for establishing AFRA and to Spain and 
France for their support for that programme. He hoped that the United States and China, 
two leading members of the Agency, would soon be adding their support. In view of the 
enthusiasm shown by Member States for the programme, and the immense benefits it was 
expected to produce, Nigeria urged that the agreement be renewed when its expiry date was 
reached. 
117. His Government supported the new concept of merging radiation protection with 
radioactive waste management, a concept which was a direct consequence of the RAP AT and 
WAMAP missions. Nigeria would be organizing a workshop on the concept at national level 
within the next 12 months. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 29 

118. Recent activities in the field of peaceful application of nuclear techniques in his 
country had included surveys to determine background radiation levels by the Energy 
Commission of Nigeria, soil fertility and geochemical mapping by the Centre for Energy 
Research and Training, and radioimmunoassay work in animal production and human 
medicine by the Nigerian Animal Protection and Research Institute. 
119. His Government was grateful for the Agency's support for technical co-operation 
projects under the 1993-94 cycle. Experience gained in the execution of those projects had 
shown the need to focus on projects which would improve the national economy and which 
could serve the needs of several institutions and organizations without unnecessary 
duplication. He urged the Agency to give Nigeria's proposals for the 1995-96 cycle serious 
consideration. 
120. His delegation had noted the steps taken by the Secretariat to implement General 
Conference resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/581, which requested the Director General to ensure 
harmony and compatibility between the Agency's programme and budget documents and its 
annual reports and accounts in order to facilitate comparison. He welcomed those efforts and 
urged that the change from an organization-based to a programme-based appropriation system 
be carried out as rapidly as possibly, since it would eventually result in improved 
transparency and better management. 
121. An effective safeguards system was vital to a credible non-proliferation regime, and 
Nigeria had followed recent developments in that area with interest. He particularly 
commended the work done by the Agency under Programme 93+2, which would permit 
evaluation of the technical, legal and financial implications of the recommendations made by 
SAGSI for the improvement of the safeguards system. The importance of cost-effectiveness 
could not be over-emphasized, and he was confident that Member States would lend support 
to the new approaches. 
122. It was reassuring that the Agency's financial situation appeared to be stabilizing, 
largely as a result of compliance by Member States with the request that they meet their 
financial obligations fully and in a timely manner. He hoped that the new pattern of 
payments would be maintained and urged that any further delays in programme 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 30 

implementation be kept to a minimum so that the important tasks entrusted to the Secretariat 
would be carried out. 

123. His delegation was deeply concerned that pledges to the TACF for 1994 had not met 
the expected target and appealed to major contributors in particular to fulfil their pledges. 
It also called on all Member States to make their pledges for the coming year as soon as 
possible. 
124. His delegation noted with satisfaction the progress made in formulating a draft treaty 
on an African nuclear-weapons-free zone. The establishment of such a zone would contribute 
to the maintenance of the non-proliferation regime, as well as strengthening peace and 
security in the region. Nigeria, as an active participant in the process, greatly valued the 
Agency's assistance to the OAU group of experts in that regard. 
125. The recently-adopted Convention on Nuclear Safety was one of the Agency's greatest 
achievements. The Convention represented a significant step towards a safer, better 
regulated and more environmentally sound nuclear world. Nigeria's decision to be an early 
signatory to the Convention bore witness to its Government's commitment to support 
measures that would strengthen nuclear safety worldwide. 
126. With regard to the question of revision of Article VI of the Statute, the need to ensure 
that the principal policy-making organs of the Agency, and notably the Board of Governors, 
reflected changes in membership was generally recognized. However, the best way of 
achieving a proper balance between requirements for equitable representation and the 
demands of the nuclear industry was still a subject of debate. In his view, the issue should 
not be set aside on the pretext of lack of consensus. If Member States were to have 
confidence in the Agency's decision-making bodies, those bodies should be properly 
representative, and the inadequate representation of the African region in particular needed 
to be remedied. The Agency should take advantage of an emerging consensus on the issue 
to discuss and agree on proposals that would strengthen the organization, and he was 
confident that if that were done the needs of the African region would receive the attention 
they deserved. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 31 

127. Mr. de YTURRIAGA (Spain) said that in 1993 the electricity produced from 
Spain's nuclear power plants, with a load factor of 86.5%, had risen to 53 900 GW-h, 
accounting for 35.3% of the country's total power production. That was the fruit of 
advanced technology, as well as of experience gained over the years in the areas of design, 
operation, safety and maintenance, experience which was now being applied to helping 
upgrade plants in Eastern Europe and the CIS. 
128. Decommissioning and radioactive waste management would be two major challenges 
for Spain in the future. The Vandellos 1 plant, which had been shut down in 1989, was due 
to be decommissioned starting 1996, and the associated plan was currently being considered 
by the Regulatory Authority. In that regard, he wished to stress the urgent need to establish 
internationally agreed exemption criteria for waste, which would enable regulatory control 
to be concentrated on those waste materials presenting a radiological risk. As for the 
present, the El Cabril facility for the treatment of low- and intermediate-level waste was in 
operation and geological work was under way in order to obtain sufficient information to 
select a site for a high-level waste repository. In addition, an extensive research and 
development programme was being carried out to develop the requisite technologies and to 
gain a thorough insight into the various processes and parameters involved in the storage of 
waste, as well as to demonstrate the long-term safety of waste storage. 
129. Turning to nuclear safety and radiological protection, he welcomed the adoption of 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety which had struck a balance between national and 
international responsibility. As statutory approval had not yet been received from the 
Council of State, his delegation had not been able to sign the Convention, but hoped to do 
so in the very near future. Spain would have liked the Convention to apply not only to 
nuclear power plants, but also to fuel cycle and waste treatment facilities, and he wished to 
underscore the commitment that had been made to prepare a convention on the safety of 
radioactive waste management. In that connection, he trusted that the Board of Governors 
would approve the Safety Fundamentals document entitled "The Principles of Radioactive 
Waste Management" at its December meeting, so that preparatory work on a waste 
management convention could commence. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 32 

130. Spain was following with great interest the Agency's work under the RADWASS 
programme, particularly in the area of decommissioning. It also attached great importance 
to the services provided by the Agency in the field of nuclear safety through the OSART, 
ASSET and RAP AT programmes and had made experts available and received missions at 
its own facilities as part of those efforts. 
131. His delegation welcomed the Agency's initiative in establishing the IRRT service with 
a view to strengthening and enhancing the effectiveness of Member States' nuclear regulatory 
bodies, as well as the establishment of the ASCOT service. 
132. Spain supported the Agency's work to develop a common basis for assessing the 
safety of nuclear power plants built to earlier standards, and the initiative to establish a 
material properties database with a view to gaining a better understanding of the ageing of 
the principal systems and components of nuclear power plants. In that connection, his 
country would continue to support the Agency's assistance programmes for upgrading older 
power plants by making available the services of Spanish firms and institutions. 
133. Furthermore, Spain would co-operate closely with other Member States and the 
Agency itself on the organization and standardization of regulatory bodies and in order to 
create a common international framework in the future. 
134. His delegation was pleased that the INES was being applied for a trial period to 
facilities other than nuclear power plants. It regarded the scale as a useful means for 
establishing a climate of understanding between the media and those responsible for nuclear 
safety, and expected its extension to other facilities to result in an improvement of the IRS. 
135. Spain was pleased to note that, at the previous week's session, the Board of 
Governors had approved the revision of the Agency's International Basic Safety Standards 
for Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources based on 
the latest ICRP recommendations, and looked forward to the preparation of guidelines on the 
practical application of the Basic Safety Standards, aimed at reducing radiation exposure. 
136. His delegation welcomed the progress made on the work to revise and update the 
Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, incorporating the 
ICRP's latest recommendations, with the object of bringing them into line with the new Basic 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 33 

Safety Standards, and hoped that a new edition would be published in 1996. It likewise 
appreciated the establishment of a database for the annual publication of a report on approval 
certificates for packages, and the forthcoming publications on quality control in transport 
operations. 

137. Spain attached particular importance to the revision of the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and the elaboration of a supplementary funding convention. 
It regretted that the scheduled Diplomatic Conference on the subject had had to be postponed 
because of disagreement within the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, 
and hoped that the latest proposals would break the deadlock. His delegation trusted that, 
pending the entry into force of those instruments, as many countries as possible with nuclear 
installations - particularly those with power reactors - would accede to the current Vienna 
Convention. In that connection it welcomed the recent accession thereto of a number of 
Eastern European countries. 
138. Turning to non-proliferation and safeguards, he welcomed Brazil, Argentina and 
Chile's accession and Cuba's forthcoming accession to the Tlatelolco Treaty, the entry into 
force of the Quadripartite Agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine 
Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials and the Agency, the progress made 
towards establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, the accession of a number of CIS 
Member States to the NPT, and the signature of full-scope safeguards agreements with some 
of those countries - all of which were significant steps towards the worldwide application of 
full-scope safeguards. Spain hoped that that spirit of co-operation would extend to the 
Middle East and that all the countries of that region would soon accede to the NPT, paving 
the way for it to become a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
139. The only discordant note was the attitude of the DPRK, which had prevented the 
Agency from applying the safeguards provided for under its safeguards agreement and had 
withdrawn from the Agency. It was to be hoped that a satisfactory solution would be found 
and that the DPRK Government would honour its international commitments. 
140. Spain, which was currently chairing the Nuclear Suppliers' Group, appealed to all 
supplier countries which had not already done so to join the Group and to accept the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 34 

Guidelines for the export of nuclear material, equipment and technology, which were set 
forth in document INFCIRC/254/Rev.l/Parts 1 and 2. 

141. It was to be hoped that work on strengthening the safeguards system would result in 
the Secretariat including in future reports a detailed statement on any failure to detect 
clandestine activities. Spain looked forward to the specific proposals which the Director 
General would be presenting to the Board in March 1995 and trusted that they would lead 
to a substantial reform of the safeguards system, to enable it to cope with the ever-increasing 
workload, and also bring about a significant improvement in the quality of safeguards. Such 
reform should be effected with the minimum of change to the legal framework and the 
minimum of extra costs, given the budgetary constraints currently prevailing. 
142. Referring to the Agency's technical co-operation activities in 1993, he welcomed the 
substantial increase in the resources provided to the technical assistance programme. Spain 
had made a great effort and managed to maintain its voluntary contributions to the TACF at 
$752 000 despite the devaluation of the peseta. It had also contributed to the technical 
assistance programme in other ways, such as hosting training courses, receiving fellows and 
providing experts for missions - services which his country would continue to offer, if the 
Agency so required. With regard to the model project concept, Spain fully supported that 
approach, as witness the co-operation it had lent to the project "Strengthening training for 
operational safety at Paks NPP" in Hungary. 
143. In conclusion, he expressed confidence that the Agency would successfully meet all 
the new challenges ahead and pledged Spain's continued full support. 
144. Mr. COLL (Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials) said that in the two years which had passed since his Agency had attended 
its first IAEA General Conference as an observer, it had made satisfactory progress. From 
the time of launching its activities at its Rio de Janeiro Headquarters in July 1992 to the end 
of 1994, it would have completed its organization, implemented its accounting system for all 
balance areas, ordered the necessary equipment and embarked on its first design verification 
inspections. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 35 

145. In the course of 1993, priority had been given to those facilities which were not under 
Agency safeguards, by verifying the design and initial inventory and implementing the 
common system of accounting and control (SCCC) for all those facilities. By the end of the 
year it had achieved its objective of ensuring that all Argentinian and Brazilian facilities were 
under either ABACC or IAEA safeguards. The work of organizing the transport of 
samples, setting up the network of laboratories in both countries, training inspectors and 
developing the necessary inspection infrastructure had required considerable effort. 
146. At the beginning of 1994, ABACC had concentrated on the interim inspections and 
on the design verification of the facilities already under Agency safeguards. In March, the 
Quadripartite Agreement between Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency had been 
signed, making the IAEA responsible for bringing all the nuclear material in both countries 
under safeguards. 
147. The States Parties had undertaken to place all the nuclear material in all nuclear 
activities under safeguards to ensure that none was diverted for use in nuclear weapons or 
other nuclear explosive devices. The Agency had the right and obligation to apply 
safeguards in accordance with the terms of the Agreement. In applying its safeguards, 
ABACC undertook to co-operate with the Agency. The Agency would apply its safeguards 
in such a manner as to enable it to verify the findings of the SCCC to ensure that there had 
been no diversion of any nuclear material. All four parties to the Agreement would cooperate 
to facilitate the implementation of safeguards, and ABACC and the Agency would 
avoid unnecessary duplication of safeguards activities. 
148. The States Parties had signed the Agreement pursuant to Article 13 of the Tlatelolco 
Treaty, to which Argentina and Brazil had acceded in January and May 1994, respectively. 
149. ABACC had already sent the Agency its initial report on the nuclear material in its 
two countries and had sent off the design information questionnaires for each of the facilities 
in Brazil and Argentina. It had also prepared the first drafts of the facility attachments for 
those facilities which had been under its control prior to the entry into force of the 
Agreement and which were now controlled by the Agency. The Liaison Committee set up 
under the Protocol had held its first meeting in May. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.5 
page 36 

150. In June the first ABACC/IAEA joint inspections had been carried out to verify the 
initial inventory and the design of the facilities. The inspections had involved a total of 
132 man-days in Brazil and 157 man-days in Argentina, and the results had been satisfactory. 
A similar inspection effort would take place in November 1994 and should enable the 
verification of the initial inventory to be completed by the end of the year, thus completing 
the initial phase of the implementation of the Quadripartite Agreement. Full implementation 
would require the preparation of procedures for ad hoc inspections, the co-ordination of 
activities to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort and discussion on the facility attachments. 
151. Co-ordination to avoid duplication was particularly important for ABACC. In that 
connection, it was ABACC's understanding that the requirement for each organization to 
reach independent conclusions in order to guarantee the effectiveness of their respective 
safeguards did not prevent them from sharing activities and results provided that in so doing 
their independence was not affected. It was also in the interests of the States Parties that 
duplication should be avoided. ABACC was confident that it would find the necessary 
balance and hoped to complete the Subsidiary Arrangements in the near future. 
152. In conclusion, ABACC was grateful to the Agency, EURATOM, and other countries 
such as the United States of America, France and the United Kingdom for their co-operation 
in its launching. 
The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
18 January 1995 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERALCONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 21 September 1994, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. SIEVERING (United States of America) 
Later: Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) 
Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

General debate and annual report for 1993 (continued) 1 - 215 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Chile 1 - 9 
Norway 10 - 19 
Saudi Arabia 20 - 33 
Belgium 34 - 37 
Croatia 38-48 
Cuba 49 - 64 
Sri Lanka 65 - 75 
Indonesia 76 - 87 
Viet Nam 88 - 95 
Qatar 96-101 
Greece 102 - 112 
Philippines 113 - 125 
Italy 126 - 138 
Syrian Arab Republic 139 - 148 
Slovak Republic 149 - 162 
Egypt 163 - 176 
New Zealand 177 - 190 
Ireland 191 - 203 
Lithuania 204 - 215 

GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/11/Rev.2. 
94-03928 (XI) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 2 

ARCAL 

ASEAN 
ASSET 
DECADES 

DPRK 
EBRD 
ECU 
EURATOM 
FAO 
G-7 
G-24 
GATT 
GRULAC 
IRRT 
London Convention 

LWR 
NPT 
OSART 
PHWR 
R&D 
RADWASS 
RBMK 
RCA 

START 
TACC 
TACF 
THORP 

Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 
UNESCO 
Vienna Convention 

WAMAP 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Association of South East Asian Nations 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Databases and Methodologies for Comparative Assessment of 
Different Energy Sources for Electricity Generation 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
European currency unit 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Group of Seven 
Group of Twenty-Four 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
Latin American and Caribbean Group 
International Regulatory Review Team 
Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping of 
Wastes and Other Matter (1972) 
Light-water reactor 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Pressurized heavy water reactor 
Research and development 
Radioactive Waste Safety Standards 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund_ 
Thermal Oxide Reprocessing Plant 
(British Nuclear Fuels Ltd.) 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
(May 1961) 
Waste Management Advisory Programme 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2) (continued) 

1. Mr. PUCCIO HUIDOBRO (Chile) recalled that on 18 January Chile had 
become a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, which confirmed its peaceful intentions and its wish 
to help extend the uses of nuclear energy in the interests of promoting national development 
at the political, economic and social levels. The associated safeguards agreement was being 
negotiated and would be concluded within the established time limit. Although it had no 
nuclear power plants, Chile had signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which would play 
a vital role in the safe and balanced development of nuclear power and technology 
worldwide. 
2. Chile's National Nuclear Development Plan, which had been submitted for 
Government approval, would be complemented by short-, medium- and long-term action 
plans involving extensive participation on the part of private companies and the secondary 
and tertiary sectors. It provided for the decentralization of activities and would promote the 
introduction of nuclear techniques for regional development purposes. In that regard, his 
delegation was convinced of the necessity of the actions that had been taken in order to 
derive maximum benefit from the resources that his country and the Agency made available 
for national nuclear development. 
3. Chile, which attached great importance to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities, believed that there should be a medium-term project aimed at evaluating their 
impact on the development of the States concerned. His Government had pledged an amount 
equal to its share of the TACF target for 1995. He thanked the Agency, and in particular 
the Department of Technical Co-operation, for the assistance which his country was 
continuing to receive. 
4. Chile, which also attached great importance to bilateral co-operation, was willing to 
collaborate with any country which regarded the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy as an 
instrument for development. Thus, it had recently drawn up an action plan for the 
establishment of a co-operation agreement with the Argentine National Atomic Energy 
Commission and was in the process of negotiating a similar agreement with the Polish 
Government. Likewise, the co-operation agreement concluded between the authorities of 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 4 

Chile and China had led to an exchange of experts and the elaboration of joint projects 
regarding - for example - the development of ceramic compounds of lithium and the 
fabrication of low-enriched fuel for research reactors. 

5. With regard to nuclear safety, he expressed concern about the procedures for 
assessing it worldwide and in particular about the International Nuclear Event Scale (INES). 
The Agency should implement without delay criteria for using ENES in the case of research 
reactors and similar facilities; improved information and a suitable classification of nuclearsafety-
related events would contribute to greater public acceptance of nuclear energy. 
6. Chile's long-standing concern with nuclear safety and radiation protection had been 
demonstrated in various ways. The 1984 regulations governing radiation protection and the 
authorization of radiation sources had been amended in 1994. During the period 1984-94, 
over 120 people had been trained in radiological protection in medicine and industry. 
Radioactive waste was still being treated at the national facility built with the Agency's 
assistance, which met all of the country's needs. In the area of metrology and secondary 
standards, procedures had been standardized at all of Chile's oncology units and an adviser 
on physical dosimetry had joined the Institute of Public Health. All radiation workers 
underwent radiological monitoring, representing altogether more than 1200 examinations a 
year. In personnel dosimetry, radon levels had been measured in the Santiago area and at 
a station in the Antarctic, workers exposed to neutrons had been given albedo dosimeters, 
and the development of high-dose neutron dosimetry had begun on the basis of the activation 
of human hair and body sodium. The Chilean Government's nuclear energy policy placed 
special emphasis on all such issues, and his delegation wished to express its appreciation to 
the Agency for the efforts it had made in the areas in question through its technical 
co-operation programme. 
7. With regard to applications of isotopes and radiation, the Chilean Atomic Energy 
Commission had launched projects relating to agriculture, the environment, water resources, 
mining and medicine, in the last of which 90% of the country's demand for isotopes was still 
being met through production within Chile. With regard to the irradiation of materials and 
foodstuffs, the capacity of the cobalt-60 source at Chile's multipurpose irradiation facility had 
been doubled in order to meet the growing demand for services. GATT's interest in 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 5 

international trade in irradiated foodstuffs was encouraging, for something had to be done 
about the restrictions which some countries were imposing on the importation of such 
foodstuffs and which were hampering the Agency's promotional efforts in that field. 

8. An educational programme aimed particularly at private companies and the secondary 
and tertiary sectors had been started with the aim of familiarizing people with the possible 
applications of nuclear techniques through a publicity campaign in the media and through 
participation in sectoral conferences and seminars and in regional, national and international 
trade fairs. The Agency was supporting that programme. With regard to training, the 
Commission had held three courses on operational radiation protection and two on 
radiological protection for paramedical personnel. Within the framework of ARCAL, a 
national seminar for managerial staff on applications of nuclear techniques - especially X-ray 
fluorescence techniques - in the mining industry had taken place in June. In addition, the 
University of Chile's Centre for Food Quality Assessment, supported by the Commission and 
the Agency, had held a seminar on analysis validation as a quality assurance method. Lastly, 
a regional course on nuclear medicine in pediatrics had been held in September with Agency 
support. 
9. All the activities he had mentioned testified to the wish of the Chilean authorities to 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy through international co-operation in accordance 
with the objectives for which the Agency had been established. 
10. Mr. DAKHTJRN (Norway) said that his country took a keen interest in the 
activities of the Agency, which was central to international co-operation in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy. One of the Agency's main tasks was to make the operation of nuclear 
power plants safer and more reliable and to help improve the qualifications of their operating 
personnel. The adoption of the International Convention on Nuclear Safety had been an 
important step in that direction and demonstrated the determination of the parties to 
co-operate in improving nuclear safety worldwide. During the elaboration of the Convention 
it had been agreed to press ahead with efforts to establish other instruments, in particular an 
international convention on waste management once the relevant Safety Fundamentals were 
in place. Member States should work towards that goal, so that work on such a convention, 
which was regarded as highly important by his country, could start soon. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 6 

11. His delegation appreciated the Agency's work in inspecting and upgrading nuclear 
power plants in countries of the former Soviet Union and Central and Eastern Europe. 
Within the limits set by its financial resources, Norway was actively supporting projects to 
improve safety at those plants. The role of the Agency should be to advise and assist the 
competent authorities, as safety must remain a national responsibility of the highest priority. 
12. He welcomed the recent publication by the Agency of a handbook on radioactive 
waste management in countries of Central and Eastern Europe - a very helpful document 
which threw light on a key part of the fuel cycle. It was important to establish a clear 
picture of the situation in all those countries, devote greater attention to the matter and apply 
urgent corrective measures. In that regard, Norway was collaborating with the Agency, the 
Russian Federation and the other Nordic countries in organizing, under the Agency's 
auspices, a meeting on waste management. 
13. Extensive civilian and non-civilian nuclear activities took place in the Arctic region, 
where radioactive waste and spent uranium fuel created a complex problem, one aspect of 
which was the dumping of such material in important fish breeding grounds and another the 
fact that facilities for processing, storing and disposing of such material were inadequate or 
completely lacking. In that regard, his delegation was grateful to the Agency for its efforts 
to monitor and assess the consequences of radioactive waste dumping in the Arctic Ocean and 
the Pacific. Norway was deeply concerned about that practice and had acceded to the 
London Convention, which it would like to see receiving universal support. 
14. Norway and the Russian Federation were conducting extensive research and 
organizing expeditions in order to monitor the possible consequences of the dumping of 
nuclear waste in the Arctic. A preliminary report on the findings of the third expedition, 
carried out by Norway in the Kara Sea, would be submitted to the Agency and to the annual 
conference of the parties to the London Convention. Norway was grateful to the Agency for 
its involvement in those activities, particularly through the special programme with wide 
international participation which it had established in order - among other things - to assess 
the consequences of such dumping. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page? 

15. The changes that had taken place in the former Soviet Union and in Central and 
Eastern Europe had affected the procedures in force for the management of spent uranium 
fuel and radioactive waste. In the past, spent fuel had normally been returned to its country 
of origin, but now there was a tendency for it to accumulate at nuclear power plants which 
were neither prepared nor equipped for such a situation. Norway, which believed that the 
situation should be addressed at the international level, had taken up the issue with a number 
of countries, including all the members of the Group of Seven. Suitable procedures and 
appropriate facilities should be established for the processing and storage of spent uranium 
fuel and radioactive waste. 
16. Norway attached great importance to the NPT and to its unconditional and indefinite 
extension. It considered the Agency's safeguards essential for preventing the diversion of 
nuclear material and continued to support wholeheartedly the efforts being made to strengthen 
the safeguards system. His delegation welcomed the agreement concluded between Ukraine 
and the Agency regarding safeguards on all nuclear materials for peaceful purposes and 
hoped that an NPT safeguards agreement would soon follow. His delegation also welcomed 
the accession to the NPT of Georgia, Kazakhstan and Kyrgyzstan and the recent ratification 
of the NPT by the Moldovan Parliament. 
17. Following a number of reports regarding cases of illegal diversion of fresh uranium 
fuel and other fissile material, Norway, which found the situation highly alarming, would 
like all countries to maintain effective controls over such material. Also, in order to detect 
and prevent such diversion his country would like to see greater international co-operation 
and increased transparency, and it would support the establishment of an international regime 
for the registration and control of fissile material. The Agency's role in that context would 
have to be examined. The agreed dismantling of a huge number of nuclear weapons and the 
storage of the resulting material made such an idea highly relevant. 
18. His delegation, which had regretted the decision of the DPRK to withdraw from the 
Agency, remained very concerned about that country's non-compliance with the NPT and its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. It very much hoped that the DPRK would allow the 
Agency to carry out a complete inspection of its fissile material and nuclear facilities. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 8 

19. In conclusion, he commended the Director General and the Secretariat on the 
comprehensive and impressive programme of technical co-operation activities in 1993 and 
announced that, subject to parliamentary approval, his Government would continue to 
contribute to the TACF. 
20. Mr. AL-NOWAISER (Saudi Arabia) said that the agenda for the present 
session emphasized the importance and multiplicity of the tasks entrusted to the Agency by 
the General Conference. He believed that the Agency was in a position to fulfil the majority 
of those tasks, which derived from its statutory mandate, but additional tasks had arisen as 
a result of developments on the international scene. He was sure that the Secretariat was 
following a judicious path in strengthening its main activities while ensuring an appropriate 
balance between the Agency's principal objectives and that it was making every effort to 
increase the effectiveness of the Agency's programmes and the resources available for them. 
21. The Agency Conference on the Nuclear Power Option at the beginning of September 
had provided additional information about the role that nuclear power could play in helping 
to meet the expected increase in energy demand and had served as a further opportunity to 
inform the public about that subject in the light of comparative studies of nuclear power and 
other sources of energy. 
22. The peaceful applications of nuclear energy in industry, agriculture, medicine and 
science were not restricted to developed countries; the benefits of nuclear energy were 
regularly being exploited in the social and economic development programmes of all 
countries. The Agency should therefore, within the framework of its efforts to promote the 
safe use of nuclear energy, play the role of intermediary between providers and users of 
nuclear techniques, equipment and material, ensuring the highest level of safety, training 
specialized technical staff and informing those in positions of responsibility at national 
establishments about radiation safety and protection standards and guidelines. It was through 
technical co-operation that the Agency could best fulfil that role. 
23. His delegation had participated in the Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar 
held just before the current session of the Conference, and Saudi Arabia welcomed most of 
the changes envisaged in the technical co-operation area, particularly the adoption of a 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 9 

practical, integrated approach to the implementation of projects with clear social and 
economic advantages, the taking into account of sustainability criteria and the participation 
of end-users in the evaluation of technical assistance requests. It hoped they would help to 
increase the effectiveness of technical co-operation activities in the interests of developing 
countries. 

24. Given the financial difficulties of the Agency arid the fact that its limited resources 
were insufficient to meet the demands of its programme, his delegation - like others - feared 
that the planned expansion of activities related to inspections, safety, radiation protection and 
waste management would lead to a reduction in the share of resources devoted by the Agency 
to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in developing countries. It was essential that the 
Agency meet developing countries' legitimate technical co-operation needs and expectations, 
which constituted an acquired right. 
25. However, his delegation did not underestimate the importance of safeguards or of 
activities related to nuclear safety, radiation protection and waste management; they were 
justified and useful. Safeguards were the only legal method for verifying that States 
respected their commitments and preventing the diversion of nuclear material from peaceful 
to military purposes; they helped to maintain peace and security in the world. It was 
therefore necessary to strengthen the safeguards system, to extend its field of application and 
to increase its effectiveness. As his delegation was concerned to maintain confidence in the 
safeguards system, it accepted that the Agency should take appropriate measures to detect 
cases where countries did not comply with their commitments, provided that the Agency 
remained within its means and that its reputation and financial situation did not suffer. In 
that context, he drew attention to the comments made by the External Auditor on 
Programme 93+2 in his report on the Agency's accounts for 1993, which suggested that the 
increase in the Agency's inspection responsibilities would lead to such an increase in 
expenditures that the Agency would be unable to produce a proposal for a strengthened and 
cost-effective safeguards system by early 1995. 
26. Most of the safeguards agreements with the Agency were concluded pursuant to the 
NPT, whose objectives were to prevent the horizontal proliferation of nuclear weapons, to 
put an end to the nuclear arms race, to bring about disarmament under international 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 10 

supervision, to define the rights and obligations of States with regard to the production and 
use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes, to promote the exchange of material and 
scientific information for those purposes and to ensure that all were able to enjoy the benefits 
in an equitable manner. Saudi Arabia had been participating in the meetings of the 
committees preparing the 1995 Conference of the Parties to the NPT (the most recent having 
been held in Geneva the previous week), which were laying the ground for an extension of 
the NPT 25 years after its entry into force. 

27. Reiterating Saudi Arabia's support for the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in the Middle East, he said his country, which was ready to help establish it, believed 
that the accession of all Middle East States to the NPT would constitute an important step 
towards the achievement of that objective; in order to ensure that the States of the Middle 
East had confidence in Agency safeguards, those safeguards would have to be applied to all 
nuclear facilities in the region. In that connection, his delegation hoped to receive from the 
Agency specific proposals concerning model agreements for the application of safeguards in 
the Middle East in accordance with the requests made in the relevant General Conference 
resolutions. 
28. The Agency had already taken, or planned to take, a series of measures aimed at 
strengthening international co-operation in the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection. 
Those measures included the adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety during the 
Diplomatic Conference held in June, in which his delegation had participated. All countries 
with nuclear power plants should accede to the Convention. 
29. Saudi Arabia, which attached particular importance to the project for producing 
potable water economically, appreciated the Secretariat's efforts and the support provided by 
certain Member States, but felt that the results to date were rather unsatisfactory. Apart 
from convening expert meetings and issuing theoretical reports on the subject, the Secretariat 
had since 1991 only carried out a regional feasibility study, which had not yet been 
completed. Citing a shortage of resources as a reason, it had not yet fixed a date for the 
launching of the proposed programme for improving public awareness of and promoting 
confidence in the use of nuclear power for water desalination. The theoretical reports 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/8 were not encouraging. They indicated that nuclear 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 11 

desalination could be economically competitive only in the case of medium-size or large 
units, which the majority of developing countries could not afford. His delegation hoped that 
the Agency, the organizations concerned and Member States would combine their efforts in 
order to ensure that tangible progress was achieved quickly in that area. 

30. With regard to the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries, 
there did not seem to be much chance of success in that area either. It would help if the 
Secretariat could obtain the resources necessary for implementing in 1995 and 1996 the 
activities of the food irradiation action plan which had been approved by the Board of 
Governors in June. 
31. As to the Agency's financial situation, the Note by the Secretariat of 8 September 
showed that for 1994 the Agency had received from Member States contributions 
representing just over half of the Regular Budget total - which was hardly a very positive 
situation. Part of the problem was perhaps the way in which the Financial Regulations 
established deadlines for the payment of contributions. 
32. It was regrettable that questions related to the financing of safeguards and technical 
assistance and to Article VI of the Agency's Statute had been on the agenda for years without 
any real progress being achieved. His delegation hoped that it would be possible to resolve 
them in the near future. 
33. Finally, he said that his delegation had been alarmed at the reports in the media about 
illicit trafficking and trade in radioactive materials and the statements made by people in 
positions of responsibility in the countries concerned and by specialists who had determined 
the countries of origin of the materials in question. Still more disquieting was the fact that 
those involved in the trafficking were transporting the radioactive materials, which 
represented a risk for people and the environment, by primitive means and without taking 
safety precautions, thereby creating a serious hazard with easily imaginable consequences. 
The governments concerned should swiftly take stringent measures to control such criminal 
acts. He hoped that the Agency also would take measures to that end in view of the 
consequences that those acts could have for human health and the environment and the risks 
of such materials being diverted for illicit purposes. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 12 

34. Mr. CEYSSENS (Belgium) said that his statement would be brief since 
Belgium's basic position regarding the various items on the agenda for the current session 
of the General Conference had already been covered by the delegate of Germany, who had 
spoken on behalf of the European Union. Belgium's energy policy, which had been 
characterized since 1980 by the desire to maintain a balanced energy mix and security of 
supply, was founded principally on the efficient utilization and the diversification of energy 
sources, protection of the environment, and the strengthening of international co-operation. 
In the light of the economic situation, and with a view to diversifying energy sources, the 
Belgian Government had decided to postpone the construction of an eighth nuclear power 
reactor; its revised investment plan foresaw a 25% involvement in the operation of two 
French reactors, which were planned to start up in 1995 and 1996, and the commissioning 
of four non-nuclear units of the gas-steam turbine type. The Belgian Parliament had 
approved the continued implementation of a reprocessing contract currently in force and the 
use of the plutonium separated under that contract, but it had requested the Government to 
suspend for a period of five years the implementation of a contract for reprocessing activities 
after the year 2000. and to consider, instead of reprocessing, a strategy based on the 
conditioning and direct disposal of irradiated fuel. Belgium wished to collaborate with the 
Agency in determining the advantages and disadvantages of the "reprocessing" and "direct 
disposal" options. 
35. With regard to radiation protection and safety, the Agence federate beige de contrdle 
nucleaire (Belgium's federal nuclear monitoring agency), which had been set up in 
April 1994 and was due to commence operations in 1995, would be responsible for checking 
both on safety and on radiation protection at establishments using ionizing radiation. It 
would also be responsible for ensuring that Agency safeguards inspectors were accompanied 
during their missions on Belgian territory, for providing training in radiation protection, for 
disseminating information on nuclear safety and radiation protection, for making preparations 
to deal with radiological emergencies at any facility and for radiation monitoring throughout 
the country. 
36. With regard to radioactive waste management, he hoped that a group of governmental 
experts would meet at the beginning of 1995 to draw up an international convention. It was 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 13 

essential that governments become involved as soon as possible since the financial and socioeconomic 
implications were considerable, as the efforts of Belgium's national organization 
for radioactive waste and fissile materials - ONDRAF - showed. In the coming years, 
Belgium would have to put into storage approximately 3000 m3 of waste, including 75 m3 of 
vitrified waste from the reprocessing of Belgian fuel at La Hague. Belgium had a temporary 
storage capacity of over 11 800 m3, so that it would be able to wait until the modalities of 
final disposal had been settled and to accumulate several years' experience with high-level 
vitrified waste from the old Eurochimic reprocessing facility. A low-level solid waste 
treatment and conditioning facility with a receiving area, a preconditioning unit, a 2000-tonne 
supercompactor and a high-capacity incinerator had gone into operation at the beginning 
of 1994. With regard to the disposal of radioactive waste at sea, the Belgian Government, 
which had been observing a moratorium since 1983, had decided to abandon the practice 
altogether and to opt for the shallow-land disposal of low-level waste having a short half-life. 
ONDRAF, in a report it had submitted to the governmental authorities in April 1994, had 
identified about 100 areas suitable for the establishment of a near-surface repository. The 
final choice of a site would probably be made during the next three years. 

37. Belgium had from the outset had extensive recourse to the civilian applications of 
nuclear technology and was very aware that the non-proliferation regime was essential for 
their continued development. It would therefore continue to support the international 
safeguards of the Agency as well as the Agency's activities relating to harmonization in the 
field of safety and to the promotion of non-power applications of nuclear energy. 
38. Mr. KRAMBERGER (Croatia), expressing the continuing and unreserved 
support of his country for the Agency's efforts to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons and 
promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, said that the Agency was playing a vital role 
in strengthening the non-proliferation regime and in monitoring compliance with nuclear 
safety standards. The mechanisms of international non-proliferation, including activities 
being conducted within the framework of the Agency, should be strengthened further. 
39. The current session of the General Conference was the last before the 1995 
Conference of the Parties to the NPT, which was the cornerstone of international security, 
and his delegation believed that the indispensable role being played by the Agency in the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 14 

implementation of Articles HI, IV and V of the NPT should be further expanded. In view 
of the unprecedented complexity of non-proliferation problems, as demonstrated by the cases 
of Iraq and the DPRK and by recent incidents of illicit trafficking in nuclear material, it was 
essential that an effective non-proliferation regime be universally accepted. For that reason, 
Croatia was very much in favour of an unconditional extension of the NPT for an indefinite 
period and hoped that its views would be shared by a large number of Member States. 

40. Also, Croatia attached great importance to the negotiations on a comprehensive test 
ban treaty, a key disarmament objective, and it would like to see an immediate end put to 
experimental nuclear explosions and a continuation of the disarmament process which had 
been initiated with START 1 and START 2. 
41. He was pleased to announce that Croatia, which had become a party to the NPT on 
29 June 1992 by virtue of succession to the former Yugoslavia, had concluded a new 
safeguards agreement with the Agency on 9 June 1994. Also, it had participated in the 
adoption of the Nuclear Safety Convention, which it would be signing as soon as the 
necessary Croatian legal procedures had been completed. 
42. Croatia, which welcomed the fact that the Board of Governors had the previous week 
approved the International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing Radiation 
and for the Safety of Radiation Sources, looked forward to the finalization of the Safety 
Fundamentals for nuclear waste management and to the start of negotiations on a convention 
dealing with that subject. 
43. Croatia was concerned about the absence of effective action to prevent illicit 
trafficking in nuclear material (including weapons-grade plutonium), which could fall into 
the hands of terrorist groups, and would like the Agency to act swiftly and help develop a 
useful database, information exchange and a rigorous system of procedures and technical 
arrangements for transport control. Manpower training should also receive greater attention. 
44. Turning to technical co-operation, he said that Croatia - a newly independent country, 
a country in transition and a developing country - was suffering from the devastating impact 
of a war which had been thrust upon it and therefore stood in dire need of Agency technical 
assistance, particularly with peaceful uses of ionizing radiation in medicine, agriculture, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 15 

industry and hydrology. Croatia especially valued the Agency's assistance with the 
establishment of its own legal and administrative infrastructure for radiation protection, 
nuclear safety and radioactive waste management; however, it would like implementation 
of the project in question to be speeded up. In addition to a number of ongoing technical 
co-operation projects, Croatia had benefited from expert advice on the strengthening of its 
analytical and in-service inspection capabilities. Thus, the Agency's Department of Research 
and Isotopes had installed an advanced microbeam line for sensitive measurements at the 
Rudjer Boskovic Institute, the main nuclear research institute in Croatia, which was 
consequently now able to provide analytical services to other countries. Moreover, Croatia 
had taken part in regional technical co-operation projects and had hosted several Agency 
workshops. Croatian scientists had been awarded fellowships and had attended various 
Agency courses, and Agency fellowship holders had been placed at the Rudjer Boskovic 
Institute. Croatia was ready to welcome more trainees, especially from other developing 
countries, and to provide highly qualified experts for Agency missions and training activities. 

45. The Agency's help in keeping technical standards at the Krsko Nuclear Power Plant 
(owned 50% by Croatia and 50% by Slovenia) at the highest possible level was greatly 
appreciated, particularly since the plant met 18.5% of Croatia's electricity needs and 
therefore played an essential role in the national economy. Croatia was lacking in energy 
resources and was therefore having to consider nuclear power as a possible energy source; 
accordingly, it would welcome more assistance and advice from the Agency, particularly 
with regard to education of the public. In that context, Croatia was looking forward to an 
imminent UNDP/Agency sectoral support mission designed to help it formulate model 
projects which might be financed by UNDP and other organizations. 
46. The priority areas for medium-term co-operation between Croatia and the Agency, 
in line with the country's overall development plans, remained the same - the strengthening 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection infrastructures, the development of a national 
energy policy (including a review of the nuclear option) and the application of nuclear 
techniques in human health (particularly the introduction of new diagnostic and therapeutic 
methods and the upgrading of radiotherapy equipment). 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 16 

47. Aware as it was of the indispensability of Agency technical assistance and 
co-operation activities, Croatia was very concerned about the financial difficulties which the 
Agency was experiencing and would continue to meet its own obligations at the earliest 
possible date, despite the heavy burden which the war had placed upon it. In fact, he was 
pleased to announce that the Croatian authorities had authorized the transfer of funds to cover 
the whole of Croatia's contribution to the Agency's budget. 
48. In conclusion, having commended the Agency for its efforts to promote peace, 
security and prosperity in the world, he said that the peace process in the former 
Yugoslavia - where the current conflict constituted the greatest European tragedy since the 
Second World War and was severely testing the principles of the United Nations and the new 
European democratic order - must be accelerated. The international community had to act 
in unison and more forcefully and put an end to the conflict, for only then would Croatia and 
other countries in the region be able to participate fully in the pursuit of the objectives to the 
achievement of which the Agency was making such a unique contribution. 
49. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba) took the opportunity of the thirtieth 
anniversary of the Joint FAO/IAEA Division to congratulate the Division on the valuable 
contribution it had made to improving food and agriculture in the world. He expressed the 
hope that the activities of the Joint Division would be strengthened and said that his 
delegation fully endorsed the GRULAC statement in support of those activities. 
50. In spite of great difficulties due to the intensification of the unjust and inhuman 
blockade being imposed on his country for the past 30 years, Cuba was endeavouring to 
pursue its nuclear programme, for it was important that developing countries assimilate new 
techniques and reduce the technological gap separating the countries which developed them 
from those which - at best - were only able to use them. 
51. Furthermore, Cuba was counting on advanced techniques - including nuclear 
techniques - to resolve various problems, particularly problems associated with food and the 
health of the population. In the 1993-94 biennium alone, it was implementing six technical 
co-operation projects in those areas, representing 56% of the total amount of technical 
assistance being provided to Cuba by the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 17 

52. Cuba was making constant efforts to improve the training of its personnel. The 
Agency's technical co-operation programme was making a significant contribution in that 
regard by enabling Cuban specialists to keep abreast of world developments in the field of 
nuclear technology. Cuba, like other developing countries, hoped that the international 
organizations would do more to promote exchanges of experience and the transfer of 
technology. It trusted that the Agency would remain faithful to its guiding principles and not 
make the provision of technical assistance to Member States dependent on political, 
economic, military or other conditions; that would be contrary to the provisions of its Statute. 
53. Reviewing his country's activities in the field of nuclear applications, he announced 
that the construction of a centre for the production and development of labelled compounds 
and radiopharmaceuticals in the outskirts of Havana would be completed by the end of the 
year. The centre would promote medical, agricultural, industrial and other applications of 
radioisotopes by meeting the demand for radioisotopes in Cuba. 
54. The Cuban Centre for Radiation Protection and Hygiene would soon have a wholebody 
counter and a secondary standard dosimetry laboratory, both provided through Agency 
technical co-operation projects. Those new facilities would give fresh impetus to efforts to 
improve the country's radiation protection services and bring them into line with the level 
of nuclear applications in Cuba. 
55. Those applications had led, inter alia, to the development, through radiomutagenesis, 
of three new rice varieties and of disease- and parasite-resistant varieties of banana and sugar 
cane. Also, Cuba was continuing to expand the use of radioisotopes and nuclear analytical 
techniques in the nickel, oil and sugar industries. In addition, it was completing a study on 
the determination of heavy metals in marine ecosystems. 
56. Cuba attached great importance to nuclear and radiation safety, and a national nuclear 
safety workshop aimed at strengthening the country's safety culture had been held for the 
first time in Cuba during the previous year. At that workshop, the results of comparative 
studies of WWERs belonging to different generations had been received with interest, as had 
those of measurements carried out on children from regions affected by the Chernobyl 
accident and of cytogenetic studies. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 18 

57. Finally, Cuba was maintaining the installations at Juragua in good order, was 
retaining the technical capability necessary for an immediate restart of construction and was 
pursuing negotiations to that end. 
58. With regard to international co-operation, Cuba had not remained on the fringes of 
efforts to ensure the safety of nuclear facilities throughout the world. It had participated 
systematically in the work of revising the Basic Safety Standards, which had been approved 
by the Board of Governors at its most recent session, and it was already bringing its 
legislation into line with the new requirements. 
59. Furthermore, his country had participated from the outset in the drafting of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety - a landmark in its field. Like other countries, Cuba had 
joined the consensus in favour of its adoption because the Convention aimed to raise the level 
of nuclear safety in the world through improvements at the national level, through 
international co-operation and through the provision of technical assistance. Cuba 
nevertheless still considered that there was a need for similar legal instruments covering other 
nuclear facility categories; without such instruments there would be no international nuclear 
safety regime capable of commanding public confidence and hence of triggering a revival of 
nuclear power worldwide. As his delegation had stated at the Diplomatic Conference held 
in June, the accession of all countries to the Convention on Nuclear Safety would not be 
achieved unless the application mechanisms took into account the ability of countries to meet 
their obligations. That did not mean that the regime adopted should involve the preferential 
treatment of some countries, on the basis of different countries' levels of economic 
and nuclear development. Otherwise, the basic thrust of the Convention would be 
lost. In order to demonstrate its political will to contribute to attainment of the 
Convention's goals, however, Cuba had signed the Convention on the day it had been opened 
for signature. It hoped that implementation of the Convention would in no case limit the 
development of signatory countries, but rather promote the transfer of necessary nuclear 
safety technology. 
60. With regard to Agency safeguards, he said that a complete ban on nuclear weapons 
was a noble objective to which all aspired and on which the future of the planet depended. 
Recently, however, the Agency had considerably intensified its safeguards activities, giving 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 19 

international public opinion the impression that they were the principal activities of the 
Agency. He wished to make several comments on the subject. 

61. The Statute stated that the Agency should "seek to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world". The 
Agency had been carrying out that task for four decades by promoting the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy in many countries. He wondered, however, whether it could 
pursue its promotional activities while constantly alerting public opinion to the risk of 
diversion of nuclear material for military purposes. One might well ask whether that would 
not make the acceptance of nuclear power by the public even more difficult and whether it 
was a good thing for the Agency to be seen as a supranational force responsible for verifying 
non-proliferation. 
62. He considered that the Agency should continue to pursue the objectives for which it 
had been created and that - consequently - it was vital to maintain an appropriate balance 
between safeguards and so-called "promotional" activities, the latter being capable of playing 
a major role in helping to resolve the crucial development problems which a large number 
of countries were facing as the century drew to a close. Care should be taken to ensure that 
strengthening of the safeguards system was carried out in conformity with the original 
mandate given to the Agency by the General Conference. That meant that increased 
effectiveness should be the direct result of improved efficiency. Furthermore, as his 
delegation had pointed out on previous occasions and in accordance with the consensus 
reached in the Board of Governors, no new measures should be applied until the necessary 
legal framework had been established and all their implications determined. In the meantime, 
Agency safeguards should continue to be applied as provided for in the agreements concluded 
with the countries concerned and in existing international treaties. 
63. With regard to the proposed measures for detecting undeclared nuclear activities, 
account should be taken of the principles adopted by the United Nations General Assembly, 
which Cuba firmly supported and according to which verification agreements should be 
applied without discrimination in such a way as to avoid all undue interference in the internal 
affairs of States and everything that might hamper their economic, technological and social 
development. In addition, the Agency, in carrying out the activities in question, should use 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 20 

only information obtained through the performance of its task and not information provided 
by national intelligence services. 

64. In conclusion, he said that his Government's decision to sign the Tlatelolco Treaty 
had been motivated solely by Cuba's desire to contribute to Latin American integration and 
by its commitment to the total elimination of nuclear weapons; the main reasons why Cuba 
had not acceded to the Treaty earlier still existed, some of them in an intensified form. 
65. Mr. DAAS (Sri Lanka) commended the Agency on the work it had done since 
its establishment. The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and safeguardsrelated 
activities had improved the quality of life and promoted economic development in 
many countries. 
66. Sri Lanka attached great importance to the Agency's role in ensuring that nuclear 
technology was not used for military purposes. The international community had a duty to 
co-operate fully with the Agency for the achievement of that noble objective, and safeguards 
agreements based on the Agency's Statute offered good ways of resolving the problems of 
all parties. 
67. The NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995 would be an important milestone 
for nuclear non-proliferation. The Agency had contributed significantly to the 
implementation of the NPT, which - despite its imperfections - was still the international 
treaty which had attracted the highest number of signatories. Given the singular contribution 
which the NPT could make to preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and thus to 
facilitating their eventual elimination, Sri Lanka would like to see universal adherence to it 
as soon as possible. His country hoped sincerely that the few nations which had still not yet 
acceded to it would do so shortly. In that context, it was important that the 1995 Conference 
be a success. 
68. While recognizing the importance of the Agency' s safeguards activities, his delegation 
considered that the resources being allocated to the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy were insufficient. Moreover, those resources should be distributed in a more rational 
and balanced manner. The ultimate goal of the international community should be to create 
a world free of nuclear arsenals and to channel the vast resources which were being used for 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 21 

nuclear armaments into economic development. In that connection, his country had noted 
the vitally important steps taken by the two major nuclear Powers to reduce their respective 
nuclear arsenals. 

69. Sri Lanka also attached great importance to the global concern regarding nuclear 
safety and radiation protection and recognized the urgent need to strengthen radiation 
protection infrastructures, to enact and enforce appropriate regulations and to intensify 
education and training in those fields. He welcomed the measures taken by the Agency to 
strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety and radiation protection and to resolve 
international radioactive waste management issues. Having embarked upon the development 
of its own radiation protection infrastructures, Sri Lanka stood to benefit from the activities 
in question and from regional model projects on radiation protection and waste management. 
70. With regard to Sri Lanka's nuclear energy programmes, his country had neither 
power reactors nor research reactors and did not envisage having recourse to nuclear power 
in the foreseeable future. It had concentrated on peaceful applications of nuclear energy in 
industry, medicine and agriculture. In the medical sector, various nuclear techniques were 
being used for disease diagnosis, the treatment of cancer and the detection of the hepatitis B 
virus in donor blood. A model project on the radiation sterilization and preservation of tissue 
grafts was making good progress. Construction of the building which was to house the tissue 
bank would soon be completed, and the radiation processing of human tissues could begin 
before the end of 1994. In view of Sri Lanka's long experience with the sterilization and 
preservation of corneas, he did not doubt that when the project was fully operational it would 
bring benefits not only to his own country but also to end-users in other countries. 
71. In the industrial sector too Sri Lanka was forging ahead, as demonstrated by its 
success in perfecting a technique for the radiation vulcanization of natural rubber which the 
competent authorities were in the process of transferring to end-users. Moreover, with the 
support of the relevant national agency non-destructive testing was currently being used in 
both the public and the private sector. In hydrology, there was considerable interest in the 
use of nuclear techniques in connection with the exploitation of groundwater resources, the 
maintenance of irrigation channels and the management of water reserves. Also, the use of 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 22 

nuclear techniques in studies of the related problems of soil erosion and water body siltation 
had yielded good results. 

72. In agriculture, nuclear techniques had made various advances possible, particularly 
the development of new varieties of rice through radiation-induced mutation breeding, the 
improvement of soil, water and fertilizer management practices, improvements in the 
biological fixation of atmospheric nitrogen by plants, and improvements in animal production 
and health. 
73. Sri Lanka did not consider nuclear power to be a viable option for electricity 
generation at present since the capacities of the commercially available power reactors were 
too high for the Sri Lankan grid. The situation might change if small or medium-size 
reactors became available. However, the results of development work on such reactors in 
recent years had been rather disappointing. Several designs had been proposed, but none of 
them had yet been proven. 
74. Sri Lanka was pleased at the progress which had been made under the RCA, to which 
it was a party. It had benefited greatly from most of the varied activities carried out, 
particularly the UNDP/Agency/RCA project on industrial applications, and a new 
UNDP/Agency project on the use of radiation and isotopes for sustainable development had 
enabled it to develop further and expand the activities initiated under that project. 
75. In its nuclear activities, Sri Lanka was pursuing environmentally friendly policies 
through its Atomic Energy Authority, which was responsible for co-operation with the 
Agency. As a developing country, it was having great difficulty in achieving the objectives 
in question, particularly owing to a lack of resources for infrastructure development. 
Nevertheless, it would continue to participate in the Agency's voluntary funding system. 
Mr. Ryzhov (Russian Federation) took the Chair. 

76. Mr. TARMIDZI (Indonesia) congratulated the Joint FAO/IAEA Division on 
its thirtieth anniversary and said that the Division's activities had brought great benefits in 
terms of human welfare in developing and developed countries. He hoped that the Agency 
would continue to support the activities of the Division, particularly in the developing 
countries. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 23 

77. He thanked the Director General and the Secretariat for the Annual Report for 1993, 
which showed that good results had been achieved; his delegation had no difficulty in 
endorsing it. The report mentioned a number of courses, seminars and conferences which 
had been held in Indonesia, and the Indonesian Government hoped that the activities in 
question would be strengthened. 
78. As a party to the NPT, Indonesia had taken note of the expanding scope of the 
Agency's activities in the safeguards area, to which it attached great importance. In 1989 
it had accepted simplified procedures for the designation of inspectors, and since 1990 it had 
been implementing a safeguards support programme. In May 1994, the Serpong Research 
Centre had taken part in the field testing of new environmental monitoring techniques being 
considered for use in safeguards. 
79. Agency safeguards were an important means of preventing proliferation, and efficient 
implementation of the NPT was contributing significantly to world peace and stability. His 
delegation was therefore pleased that so many countries had become parties to the NPT, and 
in that regard he hoped that South Africa, which was now a member of the Non-Aligned 
Movement and had acceded to the NPT in 1991, would resume its activities within the 
Agency. 
80. The NPT Review and Extension Conference, scheduled for 1995, would be an event 
of major importance for the international community. As the main legal and political barrier 
to the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the NPT had made an important contribution to 
nuclear arms control. However, for many countries the overall record of the NPT was less 
encouraging as yet. There remained divergences among the parties regarding critical aspects 
of the NPT, such as those relating to disarmament and to the dissemination of nuclear 
know-how for peaceful purposes. The problems which would confront the Review and 
Extension Conference could not therefore be reduced to the simple question of whether the 
NPT should be extended for an indefinite or a limited period. 
81. The eleventh ministerial meeting of the Non-Aligned Movement, held in Cairo in 
June 1994, had reaffirmed that, in order to be effective and lasting, the approach to 
international security should be non-discriminatory and balanced and should seek security for 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 24 

all through total nuclear disarmament, the elimination of all weapons of mass destruction and 
progressive measures to reduce conventional arms. The ministers, who had reaffirmed that 
security assurances to non-nuclear-weapon States could help to eliminate some of the dangers 
inherent in the presence of nuclear weapons, had urged the Conference on Disarmament to 
negotiate - as a matter of priority - an international convention prohibiting the use or threat 
of use of nuclear weapons under any circumstances and to undertake negotiations aimed at 
the complete elimination of all nuclear weapons within a set time-frame. In the same spirit, 
the Indonesian Government was continuing, in collaboration with the other ASEAN 
members, to pursue the concept of maintaining a nuclear-weapon-free zone in South East 
Asia. In that connection, the ASEAN foreign ministers had recently reiterated in Bangkok 
the importance of establishing a zone of peace, freedom and neutrality in the region and 
reaffirmed their commitment to the principles of peace and security. 

82. With regard to the implementation of the safeguards agreement between the Agency 
and the DPRK, his delegation had been encouraged by the Director General's report that the 
DPRK had permitted an expansion of Agency inspection activities within its territory. Also, 
it welcomed the progress which had been made in the bilateral talks between the United 
States and the DPRK. Those developments should be allowed to proceed in line with efforts 
to promote confidence in non-proliferation safeguards. 
83. His delegation was very concerned about the recent news reports regarding illicit 
trafficking in nuclear material and took little comfort in the fact that only small quantities had 
been involved. The incidents in question posed two problems, which could become 
extremely serious. The first related to nuclear proliferation, since illicit trafficking in small 
amounts of material could lead to the diversion of large amounts. The second related to the 
radiation hazards, since persons ignorant of those hazards might easily become over-exposed. 
He was pleased that the Agency was willing to take the initiative in seeking a solution and 
agreed with the Director General that Member States should begin by taking - preferably with 
the Agency's assistance - all the precautions indicated in the Agency's recommendations for 
the physical protection of nuclear material. 
84. Indonesia, which had always attached great importance to the safety of its own nuclear 
installations, was currently in the process of establishing a separate authority which would 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR,6 
page 25 

be responsible for regulating nuclear activities - a task which had been handled previously 
by a unit within the National Atomic Energy Agency. The previous day Indonesia had 
signed the Nuclear Safety Convention, an instrument which it expected to strengthen public 
confidence in nuclear activities and particularly in nuclear power. 

85. Indonesia was planning to construct its first nuclear power plant. It was therefore 
very interested in the recommendations which Agency experts had made relating to the 
choice of a site and to safety and various technical questions, and it would certainly take all 
of them into account so as to ensure that the prerequisites for construction were met. 
86. Peaceful applications of nuclear energy had been integrated into the Indonesian 
economy - notably in agriculture, food preservation, health, hydrology and industry - and his 
Government hoped that the activities in question would be strengthened. As regards 
applications of radioisotopes and ionizing radiation, in order to respond to the local demand 
it had taken measures to upgrade existing facilities and build new ones. Thus, a commercial 
irradiation facility had recently been commissioned, demonstrating successful technology 
transfer in the field of radiation sterilization. 
87. With a view to promoting South-South co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy, Indonesia, in co-operation with Argentina, had embarked upon studies on the 
encapsulation of cobalt-60 for medical and industrial applications. It hoped that South-South 
co-operation would expand to other areas, such as the exchange of experts. In that regard, 
his delegation was pleased that an Indonesian expert in tracer techniques had been recruited 
within the framework of the RCA as a regional long-term expert. In the interests of regional 
co-operation, Indonesia, which would continue to support the RCA, had made a donation of 
$50 000 and also in-kind contributions. 
, Mr. Baer (Switzerland) took the Chair. 

88. Ms. NGUYEN THI HOI (Viet Nam) said that since the previous session of 
the General Conference considerable progress had been made in international co-operation 
in the the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and that her country welcomed in particular the 
adoption of the Conyention on Nuclear Safety. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 26 

89. Viet Nam, which had recently initiated a programme concerned with radioactive waste 
management and the study of the nuclear option, was aware that safety had to be a major 
factor in its efforts to foster the utilization of nuclear techniques for the development of 
various sectors of its economy. Priority had been given to strengthening the legal 
infrastructure for radiation monitoring and radiation protection. A draft law on radiation 
monitoring was undergoing final review by the competent bodies in preparation for its 
adoption during the next parliamentary session. The National Atomic Energy Commission 
(VINATOM) had become an integral part of the Ministry of Science, Technology and the 
Environment in September 1993. Lastly, an independent regulatory body had been 
established in August to deal with matters of radiation protection and nuclear safety. 
90. As a developing Member State, Viet Nam appreciated the holding of the third 
Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar and the proposals made during it for 
increasing the effectiveness of technical assistance. Any decision of the Agency's policymaking 
organs would have to take full account of the diversity of developing countries as 
regards geography, level of development, culture and, in particular, medium- and long-term 
national priorities. The growing demand of developing countries for technical assistance in 
utilizing nuclear techniques should be given due consideration by the Agency in its future 
programmes. 
91. In Viet Nam, nuclear techniques were increasingly attracting the attention of various 
economic sectors, the result being a growing demand that such techniques be used in 
industry, agriculture, human health and environmental protection. Thanks to technology 
transfer through the Agency, VINATOM had been able to meet the industrial sector's needs 
as regards guidance, training and the development of techniques. Groundwater and 
sedimentation studies using tracers, carried out with assistance from UNPD and the Agency, 
had yielded promising results. Three years after inauguration of the Hanoi Irradiation 
Centre, the public acceptance of irradiation technology had persuaded the Government to 
fund a centre in Ho Chi Minn City for the sterilization of medical products, for which it was 
once again counting on Agency assistance. 
92. Her delegation shared the views expressed by the Director General as regards the 
Agency's activities relating to nuclear power. It was difficult to predict the future role of 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 27 

nuclear power, so thorough comparative assessments of the various energy options should 
be made from the viewpoints of environmental protection, reliability and cost-effectiveness 
in order to help Member States make a choice. Her delegation looked forward to the results 
of the DECADES programme being carried out by the Agency in co-operation with other 
organizations. 

93. The development targets that Viet Nam had set itself for the period up to the 
year 2000 would entail a rapid growth in the demand for energy, which conventional sources 
would be unable to meet. VINATOM, together with other national bodies, had been given 
the task of studying the nuclear power option in the context of the long-term development 
plan. Viet Nam hoped that assistance would be forthcoming from the Agency and from other 
Member States. 
94. With regard to safeguards and non-proliferation, she reaffirmed that Viet Nam 
supported the application of safeguards on an equitable basis, the establishment of nuclearweapon-
free zones and worldwide nuclear disarmament. Viet Nam, as a party to the NPT, 
was committed to maintaining the Agency's safeguards system and looked forward to the 
1995 NPT Review Conference. 
95. In conclusion, she thanked the Director General and his colleagues for their effective 
support for technology transfer to Viet Nam and expressed the hope that their future efforts 
to promote development and prosperity through the peaceful applications of nuclear 
techniques would also be successful. 
96. Mr. JAMAL (Qatar) said his country was firmly persuaded as to the 
importance of the nuclear weapon non-proliferation regime and believed it was essential that 
all countries, especially in the Middle East, accede to the NPT. In that context, he urged 
Member States to give the Director General greater support in his efforts to intensify the 
dialogue being conducted between the Agency and the States of the Middle East with a view 
to bringing all nuclear facilities in the region under Agency safeguards. In that regard, he 
said that real peace in the Middle East was not possible as long as Israel obstinately 
maintained its superiority in weapons of mass destruction, which constituted a serious and 
continual threat to all the peoples of the region. The conclusion of an agreement to establish 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 28 

a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East 
would be an important step towards a just, lasting and comprehensive peace in the region and 
was essential for building confidence and strengthening peace and security worldwide. In 
that connection, Qatar attached great importance to the preparations for the 1995 NPT 
Review Conference and hoped that further countries would accede to the NPT and conclude 
agreements for the application of Agency safeguards to all their nuclear facilities. 

97. As Qatar considered that nuclear safety, radiological protection and radioactive waste 
disposal were among the most important issues being dealt with by the Agency, it welcomed 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety adopted by the Diplomatic Conference held in June. 
However, the Agency's role should not be confined to problems in such areas. The Agency 
had been established to help developing countries acquire advanced technology that would 
enable them to benefit from peaceful applications of nuclear energy in agriculture, medicine, 
environmental protection and food preservation. For its part, Qatar attached great 
importance to projects aimed at ensuring water supplies for the inhabitants of arid regions 
and hoped that the Agency would help to promote the use of nuclear techniques in 
groundwater exploration. Also, his delegation believed that the work which the Agency had 
been doing in recent years on seawater desalination by means of nuclear power should be 
expedited. 
98. His delegation welcomed the changes made in certain documents pursuant to 
resolution GC(XXXVI)/RES/581. The Agency's Annual Report for 1993 was clearer and 
easier to handle than its predecessor, but it could have been improved further through the 
inclusion of information on budget implementation and on the extent to which various 
projects had enabled developing countries' real needs to be met. 
99. The recent improvement in the financial situation was a reason for optimism and 
confidence; it suggested that in future the Agency could count on having the resources 
necessary for accomplishing its tasks. The stability achieved through budgetary cuts, the 
postponement of programme activities (beginning in 1991) and improvements in the payment 
by Member States of their annual contributions was encouraging, although the Regular 
Budget remained subject to zero real growth. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 29 

100. With regard to technical assistance, one of the Agency's main tasks, an in-depth study 
showed that the Middle East's share of such assistance was small, despite the considerable 
advantages - and particularly economic ones - that could be derived from the implementation 
of projects for technical co-operation between the Agency and countries of the Middle East. 
Over and above their applications in science and the field of human health, nuclear 
techniques had become essential in agriculture, animal production, industry, food 
preservation, mineral exploration and environmental protection. The Agency should 
therefore devote greater attention to the Middle East and support the technical co-operation 
projects being implemented there, with due regard for national development plans. Also, the 
training facilities and fellowships necessary for the creation of expert teams qualified to 
assume responsibility for peaceful applications of atomic energy in the region should be made 
available. In that connection, he urged Member States - and particularly the industrialized 
ones - to fulfil their obligations with regard to the funding of Agency activities relating to 
technical assistance and the transfer of advanced technologies. 
101. The noble purposes for which the Agency had been established could only be achieved 
if its Member States, in a spirit of mutual trust, pooled their efforts in a world where peace 
and justice prevailed. For its part, Qatar would continue to support the Agency and wished 
the General Conference every success. 
102. Mr. TSQUNIS (Greece), associating himself with the statement made by the 
delegate of Germany on behalf of the European Union, said he wished to make a few 
additional remarks on behalf of his Government. 
103. His delegation approved of the Agency's Annual Report for 1993 and appreciated the 
work which had been done by the Director General and the Secretariat despite serious 
financial difficulties and the long-standing practice of zero-real-growth budgeting. 
104. Non-proliferation and safeguards issues had dominated the Agency's activities in the 
past year. The difficult tasks performed by the Agency in various parts of the world had 
shown that, more and more, the international community needed an effective safeguards 
system capable of detecting in time and preventing the clandestine production and utilization 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 30 

of nuclear material for nuclear weapons. His delegation believed that Agency safeguards 
could play an expanded role in that regard. 

105. His country, which was firmly committed to the NPT, the most widely accepted 
instrument in the field of arms control and disarmament, hoped that it would be extended 
unconditionally and indefinitely. Greece welcomed the accession of Kazakhstan, Georgia and 
Kyrgyzstan to the NPT as a valuable contribution to international peace and security. Also, 
it commended Moldova, whose parliament had ratified the NPT. It was pleased with the 
decision taken by Cuba to accede to the Tlatelolco Treaty, which had now entered into force 
for all Latin American countries. Greece would like all the nations of the world to accede 
as soon as possible to the NPT. 
106. Greece would also like all countries to decide, like the members of the European 
Union and many other States, to submit to the Agency voluntary reports on their nuclear 
exports. With regard to safeguards inspections, it attached particular importance to the 
rational sharing of inspection responsibilities between the Agency and EURATOM and 
trusted that the partnership agreement concluded by the two organizations would enable real 
savings to be made. 
107. Greece hoped that the Agency's continuing difficulties with regard to safeguards - for 
example, those connected with the DPRK - would soon be resolved. It was grateful to the 
Agency for the efforts it had made and its objective and impartial attitude. 
108. Greece was deeply concerned about illicit trafficking in nuclear material - in some 
cases weapons-grade material. Such extremely dangerous activities, which had recently 
intensified, seriously jeopardized the efforts being made in the field of non-proliferation and 
nuclear disarmament. States should strengthen their physical protection and export control 
systems, place all their nuclear activities under Agency safeguards and adhere to the 
guidelines for nuclear exports. 
109. The Agency's technical co-operation activities aimed to help Member States benefit 
from and achieve self-reliance in the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. It was important, 
however, that the Agency not only improve programme delivery but also contribute to the 
determination of national priorities in accordance with local and regional needs. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 31 

110. With regard to safety, Greece had from the outset - for obvious reasons - attached 
great importance to the work on drafting a Nuclear Safety Convention, and it was pleased 
with the outcome of the negotiations. However, the text finally agreed upon and signed 
would have been better if its scope had been broader and if it had provided for more effective 
use to be made of the Agency's technical capabilities. Greece had agreed to the compromise 
on condition that a start would be made soon with the negotiation of a similar convention on 
radioactive waste management - a process which seemed to be under way already. Nuclear 
safety was of paramount importance worldwide, particularly where facilities of a certain type 
and age were located, and improvements made by whatever means - including technical 
means - would be in the interests of all. 
111. Greece endorsed the Agency' s programme and budget for 1995 and 1996 and believed 
that zero real growth should continue to apply as far as possible. 
112. He outlined some of the activities relating to peaceful uses of atomic energy conducted 
in Greece during the past year. Following a recently promulgated presidential decree, the 
Greek Atomic Energy Commission (GAEC) was in the process of reorganizing its radiation 
protection infrastructure. In collaboration with the medical departments of the Universities 
of Athens and Ioannina, it was organizing a five-semester medical physics training course. 
Taking into account suggestions made within the framework of WAMAP, it was trying to 
make arrangements for the collection and storage of all spent sealed radiation sources. An 
Agency-organized regional seminar on the management of spent sealed sources held in 
Athens at the end of 1993 had been extremely useful. Finally, the GAEC, in collaboration 
with the European Commission, was planning to hold - for the third time - a seminar on offsite 
emergency planning and response to nuclear accidents in the spring of 1995. 
113. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) thanked the Agency for the technical assistance 
it had provided to his country in the field of nuclear energy applications. The Philippines, 
which had been effectively implementing its Agency-assisted projects, had one of the highest 
implementation rates for the region (70.7%) - a result on which it hoped to improve. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 32 

114. In the field of nuclear power, the Bataan plant was still mothballed. However, a 
study carried out at the end of 1993 had concluded that nuclear power could play a role in 
meeting the electricity demand of the country towards the end of the decade and beyond. 
Thus, that option was still under active consideration. 
115. The Philippines, a strong proponent of non-proliferation, would meet all of its 
safeguards obligations. Also, aware of the Agency's difficult financial situation, it had met 
its financial obligations in full, including the payment of its shares of the TACF and the 
RCA fund. 
116. At the request of his delegation, a supplementary item entitled "Designation of 
members of the Board of Governors" had been included in the provisional agenda of the 
General Conference. Having cited Article VI.A.I of the Agency's Statute, he said that on 
9 June 1994 the Chairman of the Board had again proposed a list of 13 Member States for 
designation as members of the Board. As in the past, the Member States had simply been 
listed alphabetically. His delegation had asked the Chairman to indicate which of those 
13 States were the "ten members most advanced in the technology of atomic energy including 
the production of source materials" and which were the members most advanced in the 
technology of atomic energy including the production of source materials in the areas in 
which none of the aforementioned ten was located. In response, the Chairman had invoked 
a Board decision, taken on 4 July 1958, that the list of designated members should be 
presented in alphabetical order. 
117. Having raised the issue in the Board a number of times to no avail, his delegation had 
felt constrained to submit it to the General Conference. Just as the General Conference had 
been competent in 1976 to request the Board to review the designation of South Africa, it 
was now competent to request the Board to indicate, pursuant to Article VI. A. 1, the category 
to which members designated in 1995 and subsequent years belonged. 
118. Although some Member States, in particular those which derived advantage from the 
status quo, had attributed all kinds of motives to his delegation, the issue had been raised for 
a simple reason: his delegation wanted the Board to comply faithfully with the provisions 
of Article VI. A. 1 of the Statute. Such compliance was a matter of great importance as it had 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 33 

direct relevance to the question of the proper representation in the Board of those Member 
States which qualified under Article VI.A.I. The Board should not approve the list 
submitted to it without knowing the criteria on which it was based. 

119. The same Member States contended that the matter was political and should remain 
so, and that there was a need to maintain the "delicate" balance in the composition of the 
Board. His delegation would be interested to know the basis on which and by whom the 
political decision in question was taken. In the most recent instance, the delegation of the 
Philippines - as a Board member - had been informed beforehand regarding the list of the 
countries to be proposed, but its involvement had ended there. It had been able to do 
nothing except express its reservations when the list was being formally adopted by the 
Board. 
120. That "political" decision was inextricably linked with the issue of transparency in the 
workings of the Board of Governors. Everyone knew that the Agency had always set great 
store by transparency in its activities, particularly in the field of safeguards. The Board had 
adopted resolutions calling on Member States to make full disclosures of information on those 
of their activities about which the Agency was concerned. With regard to designations, 
however, some members of the Board had consistently refused to be transparent. Although 
the Board had decided in 1958 that the list of members proposed for designation should be 
in alphabetical order, at least the criteria applied should be made known to all. 
121. Each of the areas enumerated in the Statute was accounted for on the list of members 
designated annually to sit on the Board of Governors. It was known that Latin America was 
represented by Argentina and Brazil alternately and that Africa had been represented by 
Egypt since 1977, but it was not known how the other members came to be designated. 
While Germany, France and the United Kingdom always had a seat on the Board, several 
West European countries alternated, in accordance with an understanding reached many years 
previously. His delegation wanted to know why that practice was not allowed in the case of 
other areas. In the case of the Far East, for example, only China and Japan were designated, 
although other States in the area were eligible. The situation was very confusing and should 
not be perpetuated on the grounds of mysterious political criteria to which only a few 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 34 

Member States were privy. The only way of rectifying the situation was faithful 
implementation of Article VI.A.l. 

122. In that regard, his delegation felt that the following criteria - among others - might 
be applied in determining which members were "the most advanced in the technology of 
atomic energy": the number of nuclear power plants in operation, under construction or 
planned; the share of electricity generation accounted for by nuclear power; the number of 
operational, reliable and fully utilized nuclear research facilities (research reactors, irradiation 
facilities, etc.); the financial resources allocated to nuclear R&D, nuclear applications, etc.; 
the level of work being done on breeder reactors, fusion reactors and other advanced 
reactors; the status of radioactive waste management; the existence of nuclear fuel cycle 
facilities; pioneering work on applications of nuclear techniques; the number of people 
engaged in nuclear R&D; the number of beneficiaries or users of nuclear applications. 
123. Tremendous changes had taken place and were continuing to take place in the world, 
and the concepts prevailing when the Agency had been established had long since lost their 
relevance. Nevertheless, many members of the Board of Governors refused to accept those 
changes. They were adamantly perpetuating a practice which was not only legally 
questionable but also unfair to many Member States. Year after year, under the cloak of 
tradition those members induced the Board to evade a responsibility assigned to it by the 
Agency's Statute. 
124. When his delegation had raised the issue at the June Board meetings, those same 
Board members had proposed that the matter be referred to the informal working group 
which was considering the question of a revision of Article VI and whose mandate was due 
for renewal at the present session of the General Conference. His delegation did not 
understand why such a serious issue should be debated by a group which was only 
"informal", especially as it was asking not for a revision of the Statute but simply for 
compliance with one of its provisions. In making that proposal, the Board members in 
question had clearly once again been defending the status quo. As the Agency's Member 
States knew, because of the myopic approach and narrow interests of those Board members 
the informal working group had not, during the several years of its existence, been able to 
rectify the anachronistic provisions of Article VI of the Statute. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 35 

125. Thus, his delegation hoped that all Member States would support the draft resolution 
contained in Attachment 2 to document GC(XXXVIII)/16, and his appeal was indeed 
addressed to all Member States. As the delegate of the United States had indicated, it was 
time to stop looking back to the past; in order to face the challenges of the twenty-first 
century it was essential to adopt a global strategy based on diversity and openness. Such a 
strategy would not be truly global or democratic, however, unless it involved the full 
participation of the entire international community, but that was not feasible at the moment 
since the Board's composition was not sufficiently representative and the method by which 
it was arrived at was less than transparent. It was therefore high time that the situation be 
rectified. 
126. Mr. INDELICATO (Italy) said that his delegation fully supported the statement 
made by the delegate of Germany on behalf of the European Union and that he merely 
wished to make a few remarks on points of special interest to his country. 
127. With regard to non-proliferation, Italy was satisfied with the preparations for the 
NPT Review and Extension Conference, which seemed likely to ensure the Conference's 
success. Italy was naturally in favour of an unconditional extension of the NPT for an 
indefinite period and of its maximum possible universalization. Indeed, the strengthening 
and full implementation of the NPT were a basic prerequisite for the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes. 
128. He congratulated the Director General on the substantial documentation which was 
being provided by the Agency to the Conference's preparatory committee and which showed 
the achievements and shortcomings of the safeguards system. Italy fully supported the 
efforts being made to strengthen the effectiveness and improve the efficiency of that system. 
The case of Iraq had shown how essential it was that all provisions of safeguards agreements 
concluded with the Agency pursuant to the NPT be fully implemented, including - when 
necessary - provisions relating to special inspections. The non-compliance of the DPRK 
with its safeguards commitments remained a cause for grave concern, although it was to be 
hoped that the current negotiations would help to resolve the problem. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 36 

129. He commended the Agency teams that had been carrying out inspections in Iraq, 
recent results of which had been highlighted in a joint declaration issued in New York in 
July, and said that his delegation welcomed the launching of the long-term monitoring 
programme provided for in Security Council resolution 715; it would no doubt result in 
increased trust between the parties concerned. 
130. Italy supported the dismantling of nuclear weapons currently under way in the Russian 
Federation and Ukraine, together with both of which it had established assistance 
programmes designed to make a real contribution to nuclear disarmament. 
131. The Nuclear Safety Convention negotiated within the framework of the Agency and 
now open for signature represented a major political achievement on the part of the 
international community, although Italy regarded the text as only the starting point in a 
process which should lead to more stringent obligations for all parties. Only a few years 
previously, even the present obligations under the Convention would have been deemed 
unacceptable by many important States. 
132. As recalled in the Convention's preamble, an international convention on the safety 
of radioactive waste management was also needed. Timely implementation of the 
RADWASS programme, particularly the adoption of the Safety Fundamentals and related 
Safety Standards, was therefore important, in order to demonstrate the possibility of 
achieving international consensus on waste management principles and requirements. 
133. Nuclear safety in countries of Central and Eastern Europe and of the former Soviet 
Union remained a priority objective of international co-operation. The strong commitment 
of the G-7 in that connection, which had been reaffirmed shortly before at the Naples 
Summit, presided over by Italy, had played a decisive role in the establishment of an action 
programme for Western assistance and of a framework for the co-ordination of initiatives. 
Important short-term measures had been taken to improve nuclear power plant safety and to 
strengthen regulatory bodies and ensure their independence. The Agency was making a 
significant contribution by evaluating the safety of plants in the countries concerned and by 
providing valuable assistance to the G-24 co-ordinating mechanism. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 37 

134. It was now time to take long-term measures on a country-by-country basis. The early 
shutdown of high-risk reactors, a process which had not yet started, should be strongly 
encouraged. In particular, the shutdown of the Chernobyl plant, which should be given high 
priority, would demonstrate to the general public the shared willingness of Ukraine and the 
international community to remedy a very disturbing situation. His delegation therefore 
associated itself with the call for urgent action made by the delegate of Germany on behalf 
of the European Union. 
135. Turning to the question of Article VI of the Agency's Statute, he said that there had 
not yet been enough progress to permit amendments that would bring it into line with new 
realities. Major changes had taken place in the world, and Italy believed that it was 
necessary to look afresh at the Board's composition - in terms both of the number of 
members and of the countries involved. His delegation hoped that future efforts within the 
working group on Article VI would make it possible to get to grips with the real issues. 
136. With regard to technical assistance, his delegation continued to appreciate the work 
being done by the Agency, and particularly the model project approach developed by the 
Department of Technical Co-operation. The concept of technical assistance packages 
proposed by the Deputy Director General was also of great interest. 
137. Since the 1970s, Italy, through the National Committee for Research and 
Development on Nuclear Energy and Alternative Energy Sources, had been working with the 
Agency on the use of the sterile-insect technique to eradicate the Mediterranean fruit fly 
without damage to the environment. The aim was to make the acquired know-how available 
throughout the world, and particularly in the developing countries of Africa and Latin 
America. With the participation of the regional authorities in Sicily, a new phase in that 
co-operation was now under way, the aim being to establish a sterile-insect production 
facility which would serve the Mediterranean basin. 
138. The agreement between the Agency, UNESCO and Italy regarding the transfer of 
administrative responsibility for the International Centre for Theoretical Physics in Trieste 
from the Agency to UNESCO had been approved by the Italian Council of Ministers on 
5 August 1994. It should soon enter into force, after ratification by the Italian Parliament. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 38 

In that connection, he paid tribute to Professor Abdus Salam, whose state of health prevented 
him from continuing as Director of the Centre, and welcomed the new Director, 
Professor Chaudhari. 

Mr. Hashim (Malaysia) took the Chair. 

139. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) commended the Agency for its efforts 
to protect mankind against the risk of mass destruction by nuclear weapons and said that the 
General Conference's agenda indicated the Agency's commitment to preventing such a 
disaster. In particular, item 28 - "Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East" called 
to mind the persistent efforts being made to eliminate the threat to the Middle East 
presented by the acquisition of nuclear weapons and to protect the region from the effects of 
the nuclear arms race that was taking place under the pretext of self-defence. 
140. The main factor heightening tension in the Middle East, and making the region a 
powder keg which might explode at any time, was the fact that Israel possessed nuclear 
weapons, that it was threatening its neighbours and that it refused to submit all its nuclear 
facilities to Agency safeguards, despite the efforts made at earlier sessions of the General 
Conference and by the Secretary-General of the United Nations to persuade it to accept 
Security Council resolution 487 and despite the steps taken by the Director General to 
implement the relevant General Conference resolutions. Israel was the only State in the 
region with nuclear weapon, which it had been producing for years, and it had the largest 
arsenal of conventional weapons. In the peace negotiations as in the past, Israel was 
endeavouring - by scheming, by circumventing the Madrid Principles and by repeatedly 
making contradictory statements - to hold on to the Arab territories which it was occupying 
while making the world believe that it was seeking peace. If it really wanted peace, it would 
have complied with the international resolutions calling for its withdrawal from all occupied 
Arab territories. 
141. The Syrian Government, believing that peace was a vital necessity for the peoples of 
the region, was making every effort to bring it about in accordance with international 
resolutions and had stated repeatedly, particularly in international fora, that it was ready to 
accept a just and global peace which provided for the withdrawal of Israel from all occupied 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 39 

Arab territories. For its part, Israel had so far insisted on keeping occupied Arab territories, 
but Syria could not accept a peace which, in its opinion, would be spurious, containing the 
seeds of war and not restoring to the Arabs their rights and territories. 

142. The threat of war did not come from Syria, which had always strived sincerely for 
peace and had demonstrated its commitment by acceding to the NPT and concluding a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. It was Israel which continually created obstacles to 
peace, relying on its military and nuclear might and on the lack of real international pressure 
to comply with international law and with the many Security Council resolutions directed at 
it. 
143. With regard to applications of nuclear energy, Syria's intentions were completely 
peaceful. Everything it did in that area was subject to Agency safeguards, and whenever it 
acquired nuclear equipment it did so in full view of the Agency, or through the Agency or 
in collaboration with the Agency. Syria looked forward to the time when States would 
succeed in bringing about implementation of the international community's resolutions 
concerning Israel as they had done in the case of other countries and would force Israel to 
comply with those resolutions, in order that a comprehensive and just peace might be 
achieved in the Middle East and the region might become a nuclear-weapon-free zone. Freed 
from the spectre of war, the region's inhabitants could then devote themselves to economic 
and social progress and contribute to the development of mankind in an environment of 
peace. It was with that aim in mind that the Syrian delegation called for the adoption of an 
appropriate resolution on the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East. In that 
connection, it believed that the resolutions regarding Israel which had been adopted by the 
General Conference, and particularly the one concerning the suspension of technical 
assistance, should remain in force until Israel accepted Agency safeguards on all its nuclear 
facilities, for Syria did not consider there to be any link between technical assistance and the 
peace negotiations. 
144. With regard to the discussions concerning the inspection of nuclear facilities in the 
DPRK, Syria hoped that the issue would be resolved through dialogue and not through 
sanctions and economic pressure or military threats. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 40 

145. It was important to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear safety, radiation 
protection and radioactive waste management, and his Government was ready to co-operate 
with the Agency to that end. His delegation would sign the Convention on Nuclear Safety 
during the present session of the General Conference. 
146. With regard to the practical utilization of food irradiation, Syria welcomed the 
co-operation under way between the Agency and other United Nations organizations and 
would like the Director General to arrange for developing countries to receive additional 
support in acquiring the means necessary for the application of that technique. 
147. It was important to strengthen the Agency activities directed towards increasing the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, to 
encourage research in the field of nuclear energy and also its peaceful applications, and to 
ensure nuclear technology transfer to developing countries with a view to their accelerated 
development. His delegation hoped that further initiatives would be taken in the interests of 
strengthening the Agency's main activities through effective programmes aimed at improving 
the scientific and technical capabilities of developing countries as regards the utilization of 
nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. In that connection, his delegation appreciated the 
services being provided by the International Nuclear Information System to scientists 
interested in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
148. Another agenda item of considerable importance for the work of the Agency was the 
one entitled "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat". Despite the requests made at previous 
sessions of the General Conference for an increase in the representation of developing 
countries in the Secretariat, and despite the efforts made by the Director General, the number 
of staff members from developing countries remained small, particularly in the Professional 
category. An increase would help to strengthen the links between the Agency and 
developing countries, which would thereby benefit in a very practical way. In that 
connection, his delegation believed that countries of the Middle East and neighbouring areas 
should receive better treatment. 
149. Mr. MI§AK (Slovak Republic) said that his country - one of the few still 
stepping up their nuclear power programmes - was making a significant effort to improve the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 41 

safety of its older nuclear power plants. The Agency was playing an irreplaceable role in 
that connection by helping his country to do so in a manner acceptable at the international 
level. Despite its difficult economic situation, Slovakia had accordingly paid its contributions 
for 1993 and 1994 in full and would do so for 1995. 

150. In the Slovak Republic it was the Nuclear Regulatory Authority that was responsible 
for regulating safety. An independent State body established on 1 January 1993, it answered 
directly to the Government. Since the beginning of 1994 its staff of nuclear experts had been 
at full complement. He thanked the Agency for having made, mainly within the framework 
of model project SLR/9/005, a major contribution to strengthening the capabilities of the 
regulatory body, which his country sorely needed. 
151. Considerable progress had been made recently with regard to the sensitive problem 
of third-party liability. On 24 August 1994, the Minister of the Economy had, as a 
temporary solution, signed the "Declaration of the Government of the Slovak Republic on 
Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage", which made operators fully liable for damage. Also, 
the Government had initiated all legislative steps necessary for Slovakia to become party to 
the Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol thereto as soon as possible. 
152. A further important legislative step had been the National Assembly's approval in 
August 1994 of a law establishing a State fund for the decommissioning of nuclear power 
plants and the treatment of spent fuel and radioactive waste. Lastly, an "Atomic Energy 
Act" would be ready by the end of 1995 at the latest. 
153. His delegation was satisfied with the outcome of the work on preparing the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, which his country had been one of the first to sign. The 
Convention, which imposed many obligations on the contracting parties, especially those with 
nuclear facilities on their territory, constituted a very important means of strengthening the 
safety of nuclear power plants in general and also of establishing confidence in safety levels 
at Slovak plants. In addition, his delegation hoped that the Convention would lead to a 
harmonized approach to the safety evaluation of all types of nuclear reactor built according 
to earlier standards. Slovakia strongly supported, as a next step, the elaboration of a 
convention on radioactive waste. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 42 

154. Nuclear energy accounted for 50% of the electricity generated in his country and was 
thus an important element in the Slovak economy. According to recent forecasts, that 
proportion would remain constant over the next 15 years. In order to restrict electricity 
imports the two WWER-440/230 units at the Bohunice V-l nuclear power plant would have 
to operate until the year 2000, the two WWER-440/213 units at the Bohunice V-2 plant 
would have to remain in operation until the end of their scheduled lifetimes and the four 
WWER-440/213 units under construction at the Mochovce site would have to be completed 
by the year 2000. In May 1994 the Slovak Government had decided to close the two 
WWER-440/230 units by the year 2000 provided that at least two units at Mochovce could 
be brought into reliable commercial operation by then. 
155. The original safety philosophy behind all those reactors did not fully comply with 
current standards, but the plants would be modified gradually with a view to improving 
safety levels and operational characteristics. Special attention was being paid to the two units 
at the Bohunice V-l plant, where safety had recently been improved considerably - as 
confirmed by several Agency missions - and would continue to be improved during the 
period 1994-97. Because it cost less, that option had been preferred to two based on the use 
of fossil fuels. With regard to safety upgrading of the WWER-440/213 units, the 
information needed in order to establish priorities was currently being gathered. 
156. The Agency had rendered valuable assistance through several national and regional 
technical co-operation projects, particularly an extrabudgetary project on the safety of 
WWERs, and through safety review missions. For the future, his delegation would suggest 
that greater effort be devoted to problems related to the decommissioning of nuclear power 
plants and to radioactive waste treatment. 
157. For Slovakia the technical assistance and co-operation programme was one of the 
Agency's most important activities, as it facilitated the transfer to Slovakia of knowledge 
from more advanced countries and enabled Slovak experts to become involved in activities 
at the international level. His delegation was satisfied that the 1995-96 programme 
responded to Slovakia's needs and priorities and that the assistance to be provided would be 
well balanced between the regulatory sector, the nuclear power generation sector and other 
areas of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. His Government had already paid its 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 43 

contribution to the TACF for 1994 and had pledged its share of the target for 1995. It was 
prepared to play an even more active role in the Agency by organizing training courses and 
technical meetings, providing expert services and receiving fellows from developing 
countries. Also, it could offer the Agency specialized services in such areas as the on-site 
training of safeguards inspectors, software development and the production of specialized 
instruments. 

158. Slovakia had always considered that rigorous compliance with the NPT and the strict 
application of all the rules of conduct deriving from its safeguards agreement with the 
Agency were of utmost importance and that they should constitute guidelines for its nuclear 
policy. It therefore welcomed the steps which the Agency was taking to strengthen the 
safeguards system. It considered that the NPT should be extended unconditionally in 1995 
for an indefinite period and that the elaboration of a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty 
was a top priority in the area of non-proliferation. 
159. Slovakia, which wanted to help the international nuclear community promote the 
peaceful utilization of nuclear energy, hoped to contribute, through its participation in the 
work of the Board of Governors, to the establishment of good relations among Member 
States and to the moderating of a flux of fast, ill-considered decisions so as to produce a slow 
but sustained chain-reaction of mutual understanding and co-operation. 
160. Slovakia welcomed the efforts being made to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in 
Africa and - within the framework of the Tlatelolco Treaty - in Latin America and also the 
recent positive developments in the Middle East. 
161. In the short time since coming into existence, Slovakia had proved that it was possible 
within a mere 18 months to adopt consistent national legislation and administrative measures 
and to demonstrate vis-a-vis its neighbours and the Agency a willingness to comply with the 
international standards and limits in force. The Slovak Nuclear Regulatory Authority and 
competent governmental bodies and national institutions had taken measures aimed at 
strengthening international co-operation and compliance in the areas of nuclear safety and 
radiological protection. 

GC(XXXVUI)/OR.6 
page 44 

162. Lastly, Slovakia had embarked on making improvements in the physical protection 
of nuclear material so as to prevent illicit trafficking. As the problem was becoming a 
serious one worldwide, Slovakia would like the Agency to do its utmost to help counter 
uncontrolled movements of nuclear material. Slovakia had joined the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group, which monitored nuclear material capable of being diverted to the manufacture of 
nuclear explosive devices and had established a regime covering dual-use items, and it was 
also helping to improve and extend that regime. In that connection, it was willing to 
co-operate with all countries which shared its principles regarding nuclear energy issues, 
particularly in efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones throughout the world. 
163. Mr. ONSY (Egypt) said that extension of the NPT should not be considered 
without an examination of its weaknesses and of the extent to which the nuclear-weapon 
States had complied with their obligations pursuant to Articles IV and VI. Also, accession 
to the NPT should be universal, and effective steps should be taken at the international level 
to protect non-nuclear-weapon countries which requested security guarantees in return for the 
acceptance of comprehensive safeguards. 
164. In order to maintain world peace and security, it was not enough to end the arms 
race, and especially the nuclear arms race; it was also necessary to eliminate all nuclear 
weapons in accordance with Article VI of the NPT. That objective had not been achieved, 
despite some progress made in the nuclear arms limitation area under agreements concluded 
between Moscow and Washington. The nuclear-weapon States should agree on a timetable 
for achieving further progress in the nuclear disarmament area and notify the other 
NPT parties. Also, it was essential to achieve an agreement on the banning of nuclear tests a 
key objective of the intensive discussions being conducted within the framework of the 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. 
165. Turning to the provisions of Article IV of the NPT, he said that developing countries 
should receive greater benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, which were vital to 
their economic and social development. 
166. As one of the first countries to sign the NPT, Egypt was firmly persuaded that the 
Middle East should be a zone free of nuclear weapons and all other weapons of mass 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 45 

destruction, and in that connection it had launched an initiative based on the provisions of 
Article VII of the NPT. Although it welcomed the progress being made towards peace in 
the Middle East, his delegation continued to believe that security and stability were possible 
only if associated with arms control and disarmament measures which applied to all States 
without exception and without discrimination. The fact that one State in the region was alone 
in having a non-peaceful nuclear programme was undoubtedly encouraging others to embark 
on an arms race. Furthermore, transparency in relation to nuclear and other weapons 
strengthened peace and helped to promote friendship and good-neighbourliness. 

167. Egypt was strongly supporting the Agency in its important task of strengthening the 
safeguards system. With regard to the Middle East, his delegation hoped that the Director 
General would pursue his dialogue with the countries of the region in the interests of 
achieving the application of safeguards to all nuclear activities there and the establishment 
of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in accordance with the relevant resolutions of the General 
Conference. His delegation appreciated the constructive role played by the Agency in the 
activities of the Multilateral Working Group on Arms Limitation and Regional Security in 
the context of the Middle East peace negotiations and considered that the Agency's 
participation was a sign of the international community's support for those negotiations. 
Also, it was grateful to the Agency for having recommended the organization of visits by 
experts from the Middle East to a nuclear power plant in a European country so that they 
might familiarize themselves with the regional verification structures and activities that 
complemented international activities. In addition, it hoped that the States of the Middle East 
which had not replied to the letters sent to them in November 1992 by the Director General 
would soon let him know their opinions about the commitments which might be provided for 
in an agreement establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region. Perhaps the Director 
General could, in the light of the replies, work out the elements of a draft agreement or 
prepare a report on basic principles, to be used as a basis for negotiations by those 
concerned. 
168. Egypt and the other countries of Africa had, together with the United Nations and the 
Organization of African Unity, been preparing a draft treaty on the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. His delegation hoped that the endeavour would succeed 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 46 

and that the objective announced in the declaration made at the first meeting of African 
Heads of State and Government - held in Cairo in 1964 - would be achieved. That would 
be a significant step towards regional and global peace and security, and his delegation hoped 
that other regions of the world - and particularly the Middle East - would achieve similar 
progress in the elimination of nuclear weapons on their territory. 

169. Given the progress made in the peace process, his delegation believed that the Agency 
should provide technical assistance to the Palestinian people. By taking such an initiative, 
the Agency would be acting in accordance with the wishes of the international community 
and in the spirit of the relevant resolutions of the United Nations General Assembly. Perhaps 
the General Conference, at its current session, should invite the Board of Governors to 
request the TACC to consider ways of providing such assistance in collaboration with other 
organizations and to submit its recommendations on the matter to the Board in December. 
170. Turning to developments in Ms country, lie said that a project relating to the 
installation of a multipurpose 22 MW(e) research reactor was under way at the Nuclear 
Science and Technology City at Inshas. A programme was being drawn up for promoting 
local participation in the construction of nuclear power plants, including the manufacture of 
equipment. The training centre at El-Daba had been equipped with an LWR and PHWR 
systems simulator. An environmental research laboratory had been established at the same 
site. 
171. With regard to the production of radioisotopes and their applications in medicine, 
agriculture and industry, Egypt was modernizing its facilities and enhancing its ability to use 
advanced techniques in nuclear medicine. The installation - with Agency help - of a 
cyclotron had increased Egypt's isotope production capacity and would enable it to provide 
services to other countries of Africa and the Arab region. Mention should also be made of 
a project involving the use of nuclear techniques to increase agricultural production and 
improve water and chemical fertilizer utilization in desert areas. 
172. Egypt attached particular importance to radiation protection and radioactive waste 
management. A treatment facility for low- and intermediate-level waste had been 
commissioned at the start of 1994 as a result of technical co-operation with the Agency. In 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 47 

that regard he said that Egypt, in collaboration with the Agency and the Arab Atomic Energy 
Agency, had organized several courses for participants from African and Arab countries at 
the Egyptian Centre for Radioactive Waste Treatment. During the previous two years, two 
seminars had been held for participants from African countries within the framework 
of AFRA and two for participants from Arab countries. 

173. Egypt had participated in the various stages of preparatory work on the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety and had signed the Convention in the belief that it would contribute 
significantly to the strengthening of international co-operation in the nuclear field and in the 
hope that its scope would later be broadened to include all types of nuclear facility. 
174. Egypt was making steady progress in areas such as nuclear power, applied research, 
plasma physics and nuclear fusion, and in collaboration with Germany it had established a 
tokamak research reactor near Inshas. It was continuing to prospect for nuclear raw 
materials and was undertaking an evaluation of the uranium reserves at a number of sites and 
a study on production methods. 
175. As regards regional co-operation, the Middle East Regional Radioisotope Centre for 
Arab Countries, together with the Egyptian Research Centre, was conducting programmes 
for the training of specialists from the region in the use of nuclear power for seawater 
desalination and of nuclear techniques in agriculture, medicine and industry. Also, it was 
carrying out a large number of research projects. 
176. Expressing his satisfaction at the historic events which had crowned the rightful 
struggle of the South African people, he warmly welcomed the Republic of South Africa now 
a democratic country - as an active member of the African family; he was confident that 
it would support efforts serving the interests of Africa within the Agency. In that regard, 
it was time to take speedy action in order to remedy the underrepresentation of Africa on the 
Board of Governors; the number of seats assigned to Africa was not in line with the growing 
number of African Member States, the African group having become the largest regional 
group within the Agency as in the United Nations. 
177. Mr. COOK (New Zealand) said he would like to outline the major issues 
which, in his delegation's opinion, the Agency would be facing in the near future. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 48 

178. New Zealand was above all concerned about nuclear proliferation. Like some of his 
colleagues, the previous week he had attended a preparatory meeting for the NPT Review 
Conference at which the essential contribution of the Agency to implementation of the NPT 
had been abundantly recognized. He thanked the Secretariat for the excellent quality of the 
documentation presented at that meeting. 
179. The importance of the decision to be taken in 1995 in New York on extension of 
the NPT could not be overstated. New Zealand regarded the NPT as the cornerstone of the 
entire non-proliferation system; without it the disarmament progress made in recent years 
would be placed at risk and the very foundation of international security would be 
undermined. His country was therefore convinced of the need for unconditional and 
indefinite extension of the NPT. 
180. He assumed that most countries would concur that the traditional safeguards system 
had worked well. The fact that the Agency had never detected any diversion of nuclear 
material from facilities under its safeguards constituted a good record. 
181. One could not, however, ignore the fact that new proliferation problems, not 
envisaged 25 years before, had now arisen. In order to retain the confidence of the 
international community, the safeguards system would have to rise to the challenge. 
Fortunately, safeguards agreements based on document INFCIRC/153 were sufficiently 
flexible to respond to changing situations. 
182. New Zealand therefore strongly supported the study being carried out by the 
Secretariat on ways of making safeguards more efficient and effective and endorsed the 
manner in which the task was being tackled. It fully agreed with the priorities set for 
Programme 93+2, including an increase in the Agency's capabilities for dealing with 
undeclared nuclear activities. 
183. Also, New Zealand welcomed other initiatives already undertaken by the Agency in 
order to promote transparency regarding nuclear activities. Since the previous General 
Conference session, his country had formally become a participant in the voluntary reporting 
system for nuclear material and specified equipment and non-nuclear material, and it would 
like all countries to participate in the system. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 49 

184. Over the past year, the Agency had continued to report to the Security Council on two 
cases of non-compliance with safeguards agreements. As regards Iraq, New Zealand 
appreciated the Director General's report on measures taken pursuant to the relevant Security 
Council resolutions, including the installation of an effective long-term monitoring and 
verification system. The DPRK issue remained unresolved. Despite encouraging 
developments, the Director General was still unable to report that the DPRK was complying 
fully with its safeguards responsibilities as urged by the General Conference in 1993. 
New Zealand was concerned at the fact that the DPRK had discharged its reactor core in 
such a way that it had become much more difficult for the Agency to verify the DPRK's 
initial report. Also, it regretted the DPRK's decision to withdraw from the Agency. 
185. Turning to more positive aspects, he welcomed the understandings reached in 
principle by the United States and the DPRK, which the New Zealand Minister of Foreign 
Affairs had described as "an important step forward in resolving the nuclear issue". There 
were, however, still significant issues to be resolved. His delegation hoped very much that 
recent developments would soon lead to the DPRK's co-operating with the Agency in fully 
implementing its safeguards agreement, with the provision of additional information and 
access to additional sites in order that the Agency might fulfil its verification responsibilities. 
186. In recent months there had been increasing concern about international trafficking in 
nuclear material. Although the problem had not yet had any direct effect on New Zealand's 
region, it could have serious proliferation implications if an end was not put to it quickly. 
His delegation believed that all countries possessing nuclear material or equipment which 
could be used in the production of nuclear weapons should apply the highest standards of 
security and physical protection. The Agency had a contribution to make in that regard, and 
New Zealand supported the ideas put forward by the Director General for practical steps 
which the Agency might take to enhance international co-operation. 
187. He did not want to give the impression that the challenge facing the Agency was due 
entirely to negative developments. There were encouraging developments in the field of 
disarmament which might have considerable implications for the Agency's workload. 
New Zealand was a leading proponent of a nuclear test ban and was playmg an active role 
in the negotiations taking place within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 50 

It had an open mind about the infrastructure needed for verification of a comprehensive test 
ban treaty, but it seemed clear that the Agency had a contribution to make in that area. 

188. Also, New Zealand regarded the proposed cut-off in the production of fissile materials 
for nuclear weapons as a significant contribution to the disarmament process. Here, too, the 
Agency had relevant expertise to assist in verification. Furthermore, the important steps 
taken by the United States towards placing fissile material from dismantled nuclear weapons 
under Agency safeguards foreshadowed further demands on the Agency in support of the 
disarmament process. 
189. With regard to his country's priorities in the year ahead, he was pleased to announce 
that New Zealand had recently become a party to the RCA. It was participating for the first 
time in the annual meeting of RCA parties, being held in parallel with the General 
Conference session, and it hoped to be able to contribute to the sharing of technical 
knowledge in the Asia/Pacific region. 
190. In conclusion, he paid tribute to the Agency for the effective way in which it had 
carried out its tasks over the past year. While it had not been easy, it would have been much 
more difficult without the skill, imagination and dedication shown by Mr. Blix and his staff. 
191. Mr. CONNOLLY (Ireland), having expressed his full support for the statement 
made by the delegate of Germany on behalf of the European Union, said that he would 
concentrate on the Irish Government's main nuclear policy objectives, which placed heavy 
emphasis on the control and elimination of nuclear weapons and on all aspects of nuclear 
safety. 
192. The proliferation of weapons of mass destruction continued to constitute a serious 
threat. Despite a number of positive trends in international relations, some States were still 
aspiring to the acquisition of a nuclear weapons capability. The growth in world stocks of 
fissile materials and a surplus of personnel with the requisite technological skills had made 
horizontal proliferation a real and immediate risk. 
193. In that context, the fact that the DPRK continued to refuse to comply with its 
obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency was a matter of grave concern 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 51 

to Ireland. It was essential for the integrity of the safeguards system as a whole that the 
Agency insist on full implementation of the terms of that agreement. 

194. While the considerable progress being made in the reduction of nuclear arsenals was 
to be welcomed, further strengthening of the non-proliferation regime was necessary given 
the challenges facing it. The fifth NPT Review Conference, which would be taking place 
in 1995, would offer a timely opportunity to strengthen the regime by building on the 
principles which underlay the NPT. Crucial decisions would have to be taken in order to 
achieve progress towards the NPT's universality and towards the complete elimination of 
nuclear weapons as envisaged by the NPT. To that end, Ireland would like to see the NPT 
extended indefinitely and unconditionally at the 1995 Conference. It would also like to see 
it strengthened, with improved verification procedures, and truly universal, through the 
accession of further States. 
195. The Agency's safeguards system played a central role in the endeavours of the 
international community to prevent nuclear weapons proliferation. Ireland therefore 
supported the efforts being made to improve and strengthen that system and looked forward 
to the proposals which the Director General would be presenting to the Board of Governors 
early in 1995. The collective determination to strengthen safeguards would, of course, be 
reflected in a collective willingness to allocate the resources necessary for that purpose. 
196. In contrast to the welcome reduction in nuclear arsenals, the growing stockpile of 
fissile material was becoming an increasingly acute problem. There now existed worldwide 
more separated fissile plutonium and highly enriched uranium than ever before. That 
situation had resulted from the dismantling of weapons and the reprocessing of spent fuel. 
Such reprocessing was continuing despite the absence of commercial fast breeder reactors in 
which it had originally been intended that the reprocessing products would be used. At the 
previous session of the General Conference, Ireland had indicated its concern about the 
reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel and, in particular, the expansion of reprocessing activities 
due to the commissioning of THORP at Sellafield in the United Kingdom. He wished to 
draw the General Conference's attention once again to the fact that reprocessing involved 
serious hazards in terms of both safety and safeguards, as it led to a growing stockpile of 
plutonium and other highly radioactive material for which there was no immediate use. The 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 52 

surplus of fissile plutonium alone already amounted to several hundred tonnes, which was 
sufficient to produce at least 100 000 nuclear weapons. That situation was unsatisfactory and 
dangerous. International discussions were currently taking place under the auspices of the 
Agency regarding the possible international management of plutonium. While welcoming 
that positive development, Ireland would like to see the Agency initiating, as a matter of 
urgency, a much broader debate on that general issue. Such a debate should focus on 
meaningful international action, starting with international surveillance of separated fissile 
material in storage and, most crucially, leading to the development of effective means of 
reducing surplus stocks. 

197. Ireland welcomed the recently adopted Convention on Nuclear Safety, which it had 
signed the previous day. However, it regretted that the Convention applied only to civil 
nuclear power plants and did not cover other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle which also posed 
a risk of radioactive contamination of the environment. Ireland had called for the inclusion 
within the Convention's scope of important activities such as nuclear waste management and 
reprocessing. Nevertheless, it was encouraged by the commitment, made at the previous 
session of the General Conference, to start preparations for a convention on nuclear waste 
management as soon as a set of basic principles had been developed; it looked forward to 
agreement on those principles at the December meetings of the Board of Governors. It was 
also encouraging that the General Conference had, at its previous session, envisaged the 
development - with time - of instruments covering other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
198. His delegation had been pleased to read in the Nuclear Safety Review 1994 about the 
growing use by Member States of the Agency's IRRT service. Seven years previously, in 
the wake of the Chernobyl accident, Ireland had proposed the provision of such a service. 
It continued to believe that one of the fundamental lessons of the Chernobyl accident was that 
operational safety was dependent on continuous oversight by an independent and competent 
regulatory authority. IRRTs, which had become an extremely useful instrument, would help 
to ensure such oversight. 
199. Since the Chernobyl accident, it had become evident that the existing international 
regime of civil liability for nuclear damage was seriously deficient in many respects. For 
that reason, Ireland considered it extremely important to update and enhance that regime, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 53 

which should ensure adequate, fair and prompt compensation for damage to health and the 
environment in the event of a nuclear accident. 

200. Ireland believed that efforts should be made not only to revise the Vienna Convention, 
but also to establish a supplementary funding convention which would provide meaningful 
compensation for nuclear damage and would attract universal acceptance. It therefore 
welcomed the integrated approach adopted by the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage and hoped that a single diplomatic conference covering both issues would 
be held soon. 
201. An important question which had not yet been settled was that of the criteria for 
determining the contribution percentages of States participating in a supplementary funding 
scheme. His delegation believed that those criteria should clearly reflect the differences 
between the risks posed by different countries. On that basis, genuinely non-nuclear States 
should be exempted from any contribution, as they would not pose any risk. 
202. With regard to the Agency's technical assistance programme, he was satisfied with 
the implementation rate achieved in 1993 and the high quality of the projects which had been 
supported by the Agency. The introduction of model projects, which brought the benefits 
of nuclear technology directly to the public, was a very commendable initiative and had given 
technical assistance new momentum. 
203. Finally, his Government appreciated the Agency's efforts to improve the efficiency 
of its programmes despite severe budgetary constraints. It had taken note of the Director 
General's remarks about the need to reassess the growing responsibilities of the Agency in 
providing essential services to Member States. The question of the resources necessary for 
discharging those responsibilities would have to be examined with an open mind if the world 
was to become a safer place for all. 
204. Mr. KUTAS (Lithuania), noting that the political map of Europe had changed 
radically in recent years, said that the occupation of the Baltic States - which had been 
entirely cut off from European co-operation - had only just come to an end. Those countries 
were currently endeavouring to take their place among the countries of Europe by developing 
their trade, their research and their technical co-operation activities and by integrating 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 54 

themselves into the safeguards system. There was greater scope for co-operation, a climate 
of openness and trust prevailed and opportunities for establishing economic and technical 
links had arisen. International organizations were being called upon to play an increasing 
role, which Lithuania considered highly important. In that context, the importance of the 
role of the Agency in preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and its efforts to bring 
about a comprehensive nuclear test ban should not be underestimated. Lithuania had acceded 
to the NPT in 1991 and was meeting its obligations scrupulously. 

205. The cases of non-compliance which had been uncovered in the non-proliferation area 
were cause for concern. It mattered but little whether the countries involved were in the 
Near East or in East Asia, since nuclear hazards knew no boundaries. All countries should 
be fully aware of the heavy responsibilities involved. Despite the present situation, however, 
Lithuania remained optimistic and hoped that common sense would prevail. 
206. Turning to the question of nuclear power, he said that everyone agreed in thinking 
that there would have to be an expansion. It was therefore important to ensure the safe 
operation of reactors and, even more, to develop the reactors which would be needed in the 
twenty-first century. The Agency's activities in the field of nuclear power plant safety were 
of prime importance, and organizations involved in the design of nuclear facilities should 
base their work on Agency recommendations. The memory of the Chernobyl accident had 
given rise to hesitancy about the construction of new nuclear facilities, but it had also had 
a positive effect in that it had obliged designers to study safety problems more carefully. 
207. The recent reports about illicit trafficking in nuclear material should prompt all States 
to adopt very strict physical protection measures. The Nuclear Suppliers Group was doing 
a considerable amount of work in that connection. His country was endeavouring to 
implement the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, to which it had 
become a party. Its customs services did not have all the necessary equipment, however, and 
Lithuania, which lacked experience and specialists, would greatly appreciate technical and 
financial assistance from international organizations and States with experience in the control 
of nuclear material. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 55 

208. Since Lithuania had been incorporated into the Soviet Union against its will, it had 
hardly been in a position to choose what power plants were constructed on its territory. The 
presence in Lithuania of the largest RBMKs in the world was due to historical reasons. 
However, the reactors at the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant were third-generation ones and 
therefore safer than the Chernobyl reactors. When Lithuania had recovered its sovereignty 
and independence, it had inherited the problems of operating and maintaining the Ignalina 
Nuclear Power Plant, which - once a totally closed-off facility - was now accessible to all. 
A large number of Western experts familiar with the equipment there had studied its specific 
features and proposed reliability and safety improvements. He thanked all donors for their 
very useful assistance. 
209. Nuclear power, which was extremely important for Lithuania, was accounting for a 
constantly rising share of the electricity produced in his country. Its share had risen from 
50% in 1990 to 80% in 1993 since, owing to an increase in the price of fossil fuels, 
electricity generated at Ignalina had become cheaper than electricity produced by fossil-fired 
plants. Electricity supply and demand scenarios were based on the assumption that the two 
Ignalina units would be operated at full capacity, and it was therefore vital to ensure their 
safety and availability. The plant management had drawn up, together with the Ministry of 
Energy, a safety improvement programme which would be continually reviewed in the light 
of new information provided by various international working groups and of the operating 
experience of all RBMK plants. 
210. Because of shortcomings in the national energy sector, Lithuania had chosen to 
continue operating the Ignalina plant - and it would require continuing assistance. It 
therefore strongly supported the OSART and ASSET programmes and the initiatives for 
strengthening national nuclear safety and radiation protection infrastructures and national 
regulatory regimes. 
211. The safety of the Ignalina plant was being evaluated on the basis of a tripartite 
agreement concluded between Sweden, Lithuania and Russia for a probabilistic safety 
assessment (Barselina project). The assessment methodology took into account the specific 
features of the plant. When the safety improvement programme had been put in place and 
the main outstanding weak points eliminated, the probability of an accident which might 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 56 

affect the area surrounding the plant would be much lower. Some of the improvements 
would be financed by the operator but, in view of the economic difficulties which Lithuania 
was facing, it would be impossible to make certain improvements without technical and 
financial support from Western countries. The Russian specialists who had designed the 
RBMKs would certainly wish to upgrade their safety and no one was as well acquainted with 
the specific features and the weak points of those reactors as they, so Lithuania hoped that 
Russia would help with the upgrading. In December 1993, the Lithuanian Minister of 
Energy and the EBRD had signed an agreement for a grant of 33 million ECU to improve 
the safety of the Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant within the framework of an operational safety 
project which would involve in-service inspections, the provision and installation of 
equipment, and short-term preventive measures. 

212. Lithuania did not yet have any nuclear legislation, but it had begun drafting laws and 
was planning to accede to the relevant conventions and international agreements. It had 
already acceded to the Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol thereto, but it was 
experiencing difficulties since certain countries, including Russia and Belarus, were not yet 
parties to them. Producers of nuclear equipment were therefore reluctant to supply the 
Ignalina Nuclear Power Plant. He hoped that Russia and Belarus would accede to the 
aforementioned instruments or find some other means of resolving the issue of liability for 
nuclear damage. He also hoped that the endeavours of the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage would be successful. 
213. Lithuania had not participated in the drafting of the Nuclear Safety Convention, but 
it had studied the text and felt able to accede to it. Convinced as it was of the importance 
of multilateral co-operation in the nuclear sector, it had embarked on a co-operative venture 
with Sweden and concluded agreements with France, Denmark, Canada, Russia, Poland, 
Belarus and other States. 
214. The issue of radioactive waste management and, more specifically, spent nuclear fuel 
disposal was becoming more and more urgent for Lithuania. In parallel with a project on 
spent nuclear fuel storage in ponds, work was being done at the Ignalina Nuclear Power 
Plant on the design of a facility for storage in metallic containers produced by a German 
company. However, those solutions were only temporary. Perhaps several countries might 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.6 
page 57 

be able to find a more permanent solution by pooling their efforts, for it was surely not 
necessary for all countries operating power reactors to construct repositories of their own. 
It would not be easy to reach agreement on that issue, and obviously a commercial basis for 
such projects would have to be created. 

215. In conclusion, he noted with pleasure that the Agency was successfully addressing 
issues related to the strengthening of safeguards, development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy and technical assistance. The Agency's technical assistance was efficient and the 
funds allocated to it were being well used, and Lithuania had greatly appreciated the 
Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar. 
The meeting rose at 7.30 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
30 November 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 


RECORD OF THE SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 22 September 1994, at 10.15 a.m. 


President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
Later: Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1993 (continued) 1-92 

Statements by the delegates of the following States 
and organization: 

Israel 1 - 16 
Turkey 17-35 
United Republic of Tanzania 36-44 
Nicaragua 45-50 
Colombia 51 -58 
Guatemala 59-67 
Peru 68-76 

Ecuador 77-85 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons 
in Latin America and the Caribbean 86-92 

8 Election of members to the Board of Governors 93 - 111 

7 General debate and annual report for 1993 (resumed) 112- 137 

Statements by the delegates of the following States: 

Ukraine 112- 126 
Belarus 127 - 137 

[*] GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 I/Rev.2. 
94-03892 (IX) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 2 


ABACC 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


Basic Safety 
Standards 

CIS 
DPRK 
G-7 
GNP 
INIS 
LDC 
NEA 
NPT 
NWFZ 
OAU 
OECD 
OPANAL 

RBMK 
SAGSI 
START 
TACF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 
UNESCO 
UNSCOM 
USSR 
Vienna Convention 
WANO 
WHO 
World Bank (EBRD) 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 

International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing 
Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 
Commonwealth of Independent States 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Group of Seven 
Gross national product 
International Nuclear Information System 
Least developed country 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear-weapon-free zone 
Organization of African Unity 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Standing Advisory Group on Safeguards Implementation 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Assistance and Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
United Nations Special Commission 
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1961) 
World Association of Nuclear Operators 
World Health Organization 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(continued) 

1. Mr. FRANK (Israel) said that it was impossible to predict how the momentous 
changes occurring in many parts of the world in recent years would evolve further. In many 
instances, however, endeavours could be made to shape the future. 
2. In the Middle East, too, the past year had seen remarkable developments with a 
significant breakthrough in the peace negotiations with the Palestinians resulting in the 
Declaration of Principles and, subsequently, the Gaza-Jericho Accord. Furthermore, the 
talks with Jordan had resulted in the termination of the state of war with that country and 
were expected to lead to a gradual normalization of relations. 
3. It was to be hoped that those achievements would act as a catalyst to further progress 
in the peace process, ushering in a new era of understanding, reconciliation, security, 
co-operation and economic growth in the region. The process had only just begun, however, 
and goodwill, patience and restraint would be required from all the parties in order to create 
a climate conducive to the confidence necessary for further progress. It should be noted that 
some States in the region kept themselves aloof from the peace process or - even worse continued 
to deny Israel's right to exist and refused to forswear war as a means of settling 
disputes. 
4. Parallel to the bilateral talks, the multilateral track of the peace process was also 
yielding promising results, despite the inherent regional problems. Israel and its partners had 
made important progress in the five working groups dealing with the environment, water, 
refugees, economic co-operation and arms control and regional security. In the last group, 
agreement was imminent on practical confidence- and security-building measures such as the 
establishment of a regional communication hub, co-operation in maritime search and rescue 
operations, and joint modalities for dealing with incidents at sea. The group's May meeting 
in Qatar had resulted in a joint declaration on arms control and regional security to be signed 
in Morocco in December. 
5. That declaration consisted of three parts, the first of which dealt with the fundamental 
principles governing security relations among the participants in the arms control and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 

page 4 

regional security process. The second part, which laid down guidelines for the process, 
specified that arms control and regional security were integral to the peace process and 
emphasized the comprehensive scope of the security process, covering a broad range of 
measures and addressing all threats to security and all categories of arms. It also set forth 
a step-by-step approach, establishing a series of ambitious goals to be attained by realistic 
methods. The basis for decision-making on each issue was to be consensus among the 
regional participants directly concerned. The third part of the declaration included statements 
of intent with regard to a number of specific objectives, namely conflict prevention, the 
limitation of military spending, the reduction of stockpiles of conventional arms and 
prevention of a conventional arms race, and the establishment of a zone free of all weapons 
of mass destruction. 

6. In view of the complexity of the peace negotiations in progress, the international 
organizations should refrain from any activities, including the adoption of resolutions, that 
might detract from the interrelated and comprehensive character of the regional negotiations. 
The evident changes in the Middle East should encourage the Agency's policy-making organs 
to adopt positions more in tune with the new situation and to demonstrate the caution and 
restraint warranted by the region's unique problems. Above all, the Agency should endorse 
the primacy of the peace talks and support the principles of free and direct negotiations 
between the parties without attempting to single out any one issue. While matters of 
security should be settled among the States of the region alone, the Agency could, at the 
invitation of the negotiating parties in the peace process, place its expertise at their disposal 
with a view to contributing to efforts to build confidence and reduce hostility among the 
States. 
7. The General Conference, at its previous year's session, had taken some cognizance 
of the peace process, and the substantive and irreversible concessions Israel was supposed 
to be making were well known. It should be remembered, however, that consensus on the 
General Conference resolutions adopted since 1991 on the application of IAEA safeguards 
in the Middle East had only been reached after the discouragement of attempts in 1992 and 
1993 to invest the Agency with greater powers in matters falling within the scope of the 
peace negotiations. Non-proliferation was to be assured primarily through the establishment 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 5 

of a credible nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, which should be directly 
negotiated between all States of the region and include stringent mutual verification 
arrangements. It should be negotiated within the framework of the peace negotiations, but 
not until peaceful relations had been established in the region. As long as several States 
continued to deny Israel's right to exist, it was inconceivable that measures infringing on its 
security should precede the establishment of peace on the negotiating agenda. However, as 
an expression of support for the eventual establishment of a NWFZ in the Middle East, Israel 
was willing once again to join the consensus on the resolution, provided no changes were 
made in the previous year's resolution in an attempt to introduce divisive issues and detract 
from the sovereignty of the peace negotiations. 

8. In view of the challenges facing the nuclear community and the vast potential of 
nuclear applications, it was essential for the Agency to concentrate on matters directly related 
to its mandate. 
9. The Agency was to be commended for its tireless efforts to dispel public misconceptions 
and gain public acceptance, especially in the field of nuclear safety. It deserved 
congratulations, in particular, on its contribution towards the successful completion of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, whose development Israel had supported and assisted from 
the outset. The Convention made available to Member States the combined experience and 
expertise of the nuclear community worldwide and could therefore be assured of the widest 
possible support. 
10. Israel had endorsed the Annex to the Final Act, which provided some necessary 
guidelines for the subsequent development of the Rules of Procedure. In particular, it called 
attention to the principle that overall responsibility for nuclear safety rested with national 
authorities alone and that no attempt should be made, when implementing the Convention 
locally, to change or dilute that responsibility. 
11. Israel also attached great importance to the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage, which had done important work in reviewing existing documents and 
elaborating a supplementary funding convention. Israel would be presenting its views on 
those matters, including the very promising new proposal by the United States of America, 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 6 

at the Committee's meeting in October. It hoped that the vital work in that area would also 
be completed successfully and that it would gain the unanimous approval of all the Member 
States. 

12. Risk management and the issue of public acceptance were generally regarded as 
crucial for any future development of industrial nuclear applications. The public's perception 
of risk was based not merely on statistical probabilities such as the expected numbers of 
deaths, but was also influenced by psychological factors. The Agency should explore ways 
and means of improving the communication of information on nuclear risk. It could, for 
instance, establish guidelines for providing unbiased information geared to public perceptions 
with a view to permitting more informed and rational decision-making. Most importantly, 
it should assist in the establishment of criteria for the detailed, objective evaluation of the 
information disseminated. 
13. The Agency's activities in the field of water desalination in arid areas had resulted 
in state-of-the-art documents and recommendations. Much remained to be done, however, 
in order to resolve that serious problem which affected his region among others. A thorough 
investigation of the optimal nuclear as well as non-nuclear options and their full implications 
was needed before a recommendation could be made concerning a demonstration plant. The 
Agency could and should act as a focal point, providing guidelines and recommendations for 
desalination based on any energy source. 
14. The Agency was to be commended for its excellent work in the high-priority area of 
food irradiation. The application of that urgently-needed technique - wholeheartedly recommended 
by all the relevant organizations - was being subjected to unjustified delays and 
obstacles, hence the pressing need to get to the root of public misgivings and to provide the 
necessary information explaining the enormous advantages of the technique. 
15. With regard to the item on the restoration of IAEA technical assistance to his country, 
he recalled that Israel had submitted a resolution to the General Conference calling for such 
action. The adoption of that resolution would represent an important step towards restoring 
Israel's confidence that it could expect fair treatment from the Agency's policy-making 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 7 

organs and that it would be permitted to enjoy its full privileges as a Member of the Agency 
in accordance with the statutory principle of the sovereign equality of Member States. 

16. "Finally, he hoped that in the coming months progress would be made in the peace 
process in his strife-torn region and that genuine confidence and reconciliation among all 
States in the region would overcome old suspicions and hostility. The Agency and the 
General Conference could support that process by squarely endorsing the primacy of the 
peace process. 
17. Ms. OK (Turkey), noting that the thirty-eighth General Conference was 
meeting in a changed economic, political and social climate in which international concerns 
about the Cold War system of security no longer existed, said that a more realistic collective 
security system had to be developed. The contemporary challenge was twofold: peace, on 
the one hand, and development on the other. Turkey heartily welcomed developments in the 
Middle East peace process and believed that the present momentum should be fully utilized 
to move at an accelerated pace towards the ultimate objectives set forth in Security Council 
resolutions 242 and 338. The General Conference should examine ways and means of 
providing assistance to the Palestinian autonomous authority. 
18. Four years had elapsed since the crisis in the Persian Gulf had been precipitated by 
the invasion of Kuwait by Iraq. Tension in the region persisted. Turkey was, however, 
pleased at the positive co-operation between Iraq, the Agency and UNSCOM with a view to 
implementation of Security Council resolutions 707 and 715. It urged Iraq to meet all of its 
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions so that it could resume its place 
in the international community. 
19. Her delegation was also heartened by the improving situation on the Korean Peninsula 
and hoped that Agency inspections would be applied to the second processing line. Peace 
on the Peninsula was important for detente in the world as a whole. As the time approached 
for the extension of the NPT, the international community wanted to see guarantees for and 
a commitment to full compliance with the Treaty. Her delegation hoped that those 
consultations on the Treaty's extension would be fruitful. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 8 

20. One of the Agency's outstanding achievements of the past year had been the 
preparation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which Turkey had signed. The Convention 
should help improve safety at nuclear power plants. Although the Convention represented 
a major step forward in terms of formulating national safety regulations, its scope remained 
limited. Work should proceed on developing further international safety instruments for 
other parts of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
21. The Secretariat was to be congratulated on finalizing the Basic Safety Standards for 
Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources, contained in 
document GOV/2715. That document would fill a major gap in that particular area at the 
international level. 
22. Her delegation was pleased at the progress made by the Secretariat in promulgating 
the Safety Fundamentals document on the principles of radioactive waste management. It 
urged the Secretariat to expedite finalization of all the documents in the Safety Standards 
series and to plan activities leading to the drafting of a safety convention on waste 
management. 
23. Although it had no nuclear power programme, Turkey attached great importance to 
the subject of radioactive waste. It had - with the Agency's help - set up a radioactive waste 
processing plant at the Istanbul Cekmece Nuclear Research Centre to process low-level 
radioactive waste from medicine and industry. Her Government hoped that the Agency 
would make more use of the plant in future for regional training purposes. 
24. In view of the significance of studies to evaluate the dumping of radioactive waste at 
sea, the Turkish Atomic Energy Authority had proposed the establishment of a laboratory, 
similar to that in Monaco, to carry out research into radiological and environmental waste 
management. 
25. Substantial work had been done during the past year on the question of liability for 
nuclear damage. Unfortunately the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage 
had not been able to reach agreement regarding the two alternative systems for a 
supplementary funding convention. Her delegation hoped that the Standing Committee would 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 9 

be able to settle the outstanding issues at its forthcoming meetings in October and November 
and reach consensus on a final text of a convention on supplementary funding. 

26. Nuclear applications had a major role to play in the assessment of limited water 
resources and their optimum management. Turkey was pleased with the activities and 
regional projects being undertaken by the Agency in that field and had itself been actively 
involved in the regional project entitled "Isotope Hydrology in the Middle East" 
(RER/8/002). While Turkey's freshwater resources were sufficient for the time being, future 
development schemes would involve more complex hydrological systems where nuclear 
applications would be of particular use. Turkey's national isotope hydrology laboratory, 
established in 1964, provided services to all the relevant national bodies. The laboratory had 
recently been upgraded and now had a full analytical capability for undertaking 
environmental isotope analyses of water samples for hydrological applications. Her country 
was grateful for the support given by the Agency in that regard and was willing to co-operate 
in future regional projects in the Middle East in the field of isotope hydrology. 
27. Her Government was closely following the Agency's activities in relation to the safety 
assessment of RBMK and old WWER-type reactors in Eastern and Central Europe. It 
welcomed the follow-up safety missions to all WWER-440/230 plants and the seismic review 
missions. Nevertheless, it reminded the Secretariat that under Article 6 of the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety, if the safety of a nuclear installation could not be upgraded, plans to shut 
down the installation should be implemented as soon as practically possible. The Secretariat 
should therefore keep Member States, particularly those situated near such plants, informed 
of the Agency's activities to strengthen the safety of such plants. It should also submit 
periodical reports on safety improvements to review conferences of the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety and make recommendations as to whether individual plants should be allowed 
to continue operating. Furthermore, concerned Member States should have access to 
information available in the Secretariat on the accident risk, operational standards and seismic 
situation of those plants. Her delegation also believed that the development of national legal 
and regulatory structures in the countries in which those reactors were located was of the 
utmost importance. The Secretariat should provide assistance to the States concerned and 
report on progress to the Board. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 10 

28. The forthcoming NPT Extension Conference in 1995 focused attention on the 
Agency's increasing role in developing a more effective safeguards regime. While there was 
a strong commitment on the part of many countries, including Turkey, to extend the NPT 
regime unconditionally and indefinitely, there were also serious concerns about its 
shortcomings, particularly with regard to its monitoring and verification mechanisms. One 
of the most efficient ways of strengthening the NPT was international monitoring of trade 
in fissionable material and technologies. The Board had already endorsed a voluntary 
reporting scheme under which Member States would provide information required under 
existing safeguards agreements. That was a positive development and her country hoped that 
all Member States would participate. Her delegation also welcomed the measures put 
forward by SAGSI to enhance the Agency's ability to detect undeclared facilities and 
activities. 
29. The General Conference should take advantage of the current climate of detente and 
try to close loopholes in the safeguards regime. Whereas, in the past, Agency safeguards 
had been limited to declared programmes, the demands had changed since the case of Iraq. 
The Secretariat's ability to detect undisclosed nuclear installations and material was enhanced 
by access to information from Member States. The Agency was pursuing its right to 
undertake special inspections and the Security Council had been much more active than 
before in utilizing its right to take enforcement measures in cases of non-compliance. While 
fully supporting those developments, Turkey considered that the NPT Extension Conference 
should make a new leap forward in reinforcing the safeguards system in general by a 
declared consensus of the signatories. That would further strengthen the Agency's continuing 
search for verification methods. Turkey called on all Governments to agree to increased 
nuclear transparency through the addition of new features to the safeguard's system. It 
should be remembered that safeguards were dynamic and that new verification means would 
develop in the nuclear arms and disarmament field. The Agency would assume new tasks 
and responsibilities and consequently would need new experts and techniques to carry them 
out. Her delegation looked forward to those developments and supported the Director 
General's endeavours in that regard. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 11 

30. A major deficiency in the safeguards system was inefficient control of the removal, 
transfer and sale of fissile material. At the previous session of the General Conference, her 
delegation had reported incidents of trafficking in nuclear material in Turkey. Since then, 
cases had been discovered in other countries. The time had come to take measures to 
prevent trafficking. The Secretariat should prepare a programme to assist the countries of 
origin of such material to develop national control and enforcement regulations and should 
also help establish an international control mechanism. Her delegation proposed that a 
standing group of experts should be set up to elaborate the details of such a mechanism. 
Certain measures could be taken within the context of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. 
The group should also examine the possibility of including additional provisions in the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material aimed at controlling illegal 
trafficking at border crossings. 
31. Her delegation commended the Secretariat on the Agency's performance in 1993 
within the scope of the zero-growth budget. Although Turkey had paid in full its voluntary 
contribution to the TACF for 1994, its assessed programme costs for 1993, and had pledged 
$166 050 to the TACF for 1995, the amount of technical assistance envisaged for Turkey for 
the period 1995-96 did not seem satisfactory compared with previous years. As that situation 
was apparently attributable to the Agency's present financial difficulties, ways of obtaining 
new financial resources for technical assistance should be explored as well as co-operation 
with other international organizations active in similar areas. 
32. Turkey supported the model project concept and other steps to increase the efficiency 
and effectiveness of technical assistance and co-operation in line with the conclusions of the 
1994 Technical Co-operation Policy Review Seminar. It also noted that new geographical 
groupings had been established for joint regional activities under the technical co-operation 
programme in Europe, the Middle East and Asia, and felt the Agency had an important role 
to play in enhancing the environment for such activities. 
33. The use of nuclear energy in non-power as well as power applications had gained 
momentum. It was therefore important to organize mass media education programmes for 
the general public describing the immense benefits of the peaceful use of nuclear 
technologies. Public opinion had become very sensitive after the Chernobyl accident and 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 12 

environmental issues presented additional concerns. The Agency could contribute to 
programmes of that type in countries where the public was particularly sensitive about the 
use of nuclear energy. 

34. The Turkish Atomic Energy Authority was hosting more and more Agency coordinated 
research studies, and regional and interregional training activities. The ninth 
International Meeting on Radiation Processing, arranged by the Turkish Atomic Energy 
Commission in co-operation with the Agency had just taken place in Istanbul. Turkey was 
prepared to allocate additional resources to host more such activities. Furthermore, Turkey 
had proposed, as a new area of co-operation, technical co-operation between the Black Sea 
countries on radiation protection and environmental safety and hoped that the Agency would 
actively support that project. 
35. Finally, turning to the subject of staffing of the Secretariat, she said that her 
delegation appreciated the measures taken by the Secretariat to increase the representation 
of nationals from developing countries and the representation of women. It welcomed the 
substantial increase in well-qualified and qualified applicants from developing countries and 
the fact that 41.5% of vacancies were filled by applicants from developing countries. It 
hoped that more well-qualified women, particularly from developing countries, would be 
made aware of vacancies and apply for posts in the Agency. The Secretariat should also 
ensure that sufficient promotion opportunities were being offered to applicants from 
developing countries and to women. 
36. Mr. MKAPA (Tanzania) noted that the message from the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations provided useful guidance on the formulation of strategies for the spread 
of the peaceful applications of nuclear technology. 
37. His country was grateful for the technical assistance which it received from the 
Agency. As one of the least developed countries, Tanzania urgently needed support and 
assistance with the acquisition and adaptation of nuclear techniques which would accelerate 
its social and economic development and help combat poverty, disease and famine. His 
country was appreciative of the support which the Agency was giving to Tanzania through 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 13 

the funding of twelve projects that formed a basis for the development and improvement of 
the use of nuclear technology. 

38. The Agency's approval of a model project on the total eradication of the tsetse fly on 
Zanzibar Island was particularly welcome. The project had been initiated in January 1994 
and it was estimated that it would cost $8 314 800 up to 1997. The Agency, together with 
Belgium, Canada, the United Kingdom and the United States of America, had already 
contributed $1 612 800, which was sufficient to fund all the project activities which were 
being carried out during 1994. His country was highly appreciative of that bilateral 
assistance and requested other Member States to provide additional extrabudgetary funding 
through the Agency for that project. 
39. Conditions in sub-Saharan Africa were ideal for numerous animal pests and diseases 
which hampered the development of agriculture and livestock thus preventing countries from 
achieving self-sufficiency in food production. More than any other disease and pest 
combination, the tsetse fly and the debilitating disease it transmitted, trypanosomiasis, 
profoundly affected the pattern of agriculture in the region, approximately 10 million km2, 
or about one half of the non-desert area of Africa. Zanzibar was a clear example of the 
problem and provided a unique opportunity to demonstrate the potential benefits of an 
integrated approach to tsetse eradication. 
40. He was grateful to Member States for the contributions they had made to the TACF 
and for the experts they had provided thus enabling the Agency to provide assistance to 
LDCs like Tanzania. The understanding which the Agency and Member States had shown 
with regard to Tanzania's difficulties in meeting its financial obligations owing to economic 
constraints had also been noted and was deeply appreciated. 
41. He commended the Agency's efforts to promote regional co-operation ventures as a 
means of accelerating the acquisition of nuclear technology, and in particular the support 
which was being given to the activities of AFRA. The aim of that regional grouping was to 
create and implement viable programmes through genuine sharing of resources, expertise, 
knowledge and technologies between members, in order to build up regional capabilities for 
the accelerated introduction of nuclear technology. The Agency was making concerted 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 14 

efforts through the TACF and extrabudgetary funds to ensure the success of AFRA 
programmes. His delegation noted those efforts with great appreciation and appealed for 
their continuation. He also commende'd France and Spain for the support they had provided 
in the form of extrabudgetary contributions and appealed to other donors to come forward 
and support the 1995/1996 AFRA programme. 

42. The efforts made by the Agency to review its policies and programmes through 
consultation with Member States, such as the recent Technical Co-operation Policy Review 
Seminar, were highly commendable. Owing to financial constraints, Tanzania had not been 
represented, but it endorsed the Seminar's conclusions and hoped that the recommendations 
which had been made would be acceptable and beneficial to all Member States. 
43. He associated himself with those Member States which had expressed the view that 
technical assistance should be funded through the Regular Budget or from comparably 
predictable and assured resources. Developing Member States were particularly worried that 
the efforts to strengthen safeguards might inhibit funding of technical assistance or impair the 
predictability of technical co-operation resources. 
44. While Tanzania acknowledged the desirability that the Agency, by virtue of its highly 
technical nature, should be devoid of politics, politics often could not be avoided in the 
implementation of such statutory functions as the enforcement of the NPT through the 
safeguards system or in discussions on the nuclear capabilities of both signatory and nonsignatory 
States to the NPT. In such cases, the salient issues had to be debated frankly and 
openly, and with a lot of goodwill. 
45. Mr. ARGUELLO (Nicaragua) commended the efforts made by Argentina, 
Brazil and Chile in the first half of the year to complete the legal processes necessary for 
ratification of the Tlatelolco Treaty. In that context, Nicaragua welcomed Cuba's decision 
in August to become a full party to that Treaty, which would turn Latin America and the 
Caribbean into a nuclear-weapon-free zone and strengthen the move towards demilitarization, 
harmony and political democracy, with attendant material and social benefits for the people 
of that region. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 15 

46. Nicaragua also joined other countries in approving the progress made in the Middle 
East peace talks the previous year and trusted that they would help to create an environment 
of mutual Confidence and provide the security necessary for the creation of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in that part of the world. 
47. Nicaragua was a firm believer in the benefits of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
Parallel to economic reforms and a consolidation of its democratic system, it was fulfilling 
the legal requirements necessary to enjoy such benefits. At the end of 1993, Nicaragua had 
deposited the instruments of ratification of the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear 
Accident and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. It had also promulgated a Law on Ionizing Radiation, had created an Atomic 
Energy Commission and completed the procedures necessary for joining INIS and ARCAL, 
Finally, having approved the amendments to the Tlatelolco Treaty, it was ready to sign the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety approved by the Diplomatic Conference in June. 
48. Co-operation between the Agency and Nicaragua was already beginning to bear fruit. 
The installation of a cobalt-60 teletherapy unit, which would also serve neighbouring 
countries, had recently been completed with the assistance and collaboration of the Agency 
and substantial financial support from Norway and France. Other activities included 
programmes to improve agricultural production, the diagnosis of animal diseases, geothermic 
field studies, and the introduction of isotope techniques in hydrology. He was confident that 
the dedication of the staff of the Department of Technical Co-operation would help to ensure 
the successful implementation of the projects in spite of the difficult physical conditions. The 
training courses for technicians and professionals organized by the Agency in the field of 
nuclear technology were an important component of the co-operation. 
49. Repeating an appeal made the previous year urging the Board of Governors to 
increase the total percentage of the Agency's resources allocated for technical assistance, he 
formally requested that additional resources be made available for technical assistance in 
Central America, particularly as the Agency did not have to devote any of its safeguards 
budget to that region. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 16 

50. The poverty, environmental destruction and political chaos prevalent in different parts 
of the world were, like disarmament and non-proliferation, universal issues creating 
challenges for the whole of humanity. Inequalities between countries were no more 
acceptable than inequalities within a single country. The peaceful use of nuclear energy was 
one way in which those inequalities could be eliminated. To skimp on the capital and 
technology required to promote the application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes was 
not only morally unacceptable, but also politically counterproductive. Environmental 
pollution and the lack of political freedom produced by underdevelopment and poverty were 
a time bomb which threatened the whole of humanity. 
51. Mr. GARCIA GONZALEZ (Colombia) commended the Agency for its 
excellent work in promoting international co-operation in the field of radiological protection 
and nuclear safety. In particular, its recent success in securing the adoption of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety would provide the necessary legal framework for the safe 
development of nuclear power. 
52. His country attached great importance to achieving a balance between the Agency's 
promotional and regulatory activities and to the role played by safeguards in maintaining the 
non-proliferation regime. Together with the safety of nuclear installations, one of the most 
urgent challenges confronting the international community in the field of nuclear energy was 
that of strengthening the non-proliferation regime. The particular task now facing Member 
States was to examine recent political changes and technological developments throughout 
the world with reference to the Agency and its future activities, and to assess those activities 
in terms of their impact on the Member States. The Medium Term Plan, based on a 
consultative process between the Agency and Member States, provided the strategic 
framework necessary for the Agency's orientation in the coming years. 
53. The Agency's efforts to promote regional co-operation with a view to the transfer of 
technology to developing countries deserved special mention. The assistance provided to 
Latin American countries through the ARCAL programme was proving successful in 
ensuring the efficient and effective use of the available resources and evaluating the results 
achieved both nationally and regionally. The recent conclusion of a tripartite agreement 
between the Agency, Colombia and the United States of America for the supply to Colombia 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 17 

of special fissile material in the form of fuel elements for its IAN-R1 research reactor was 
a specific instance of the Agency's success in that area of its work. 

54. On the eve of the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, Colombia's concerns were to 
strengthen the Treaty's application to ensure its continued value as a means of preventing 
proliferation and to reaffirm its status as the only instrument available to the international 
community for dealing with the nuclear-weapon States that were party to it. 
55. Five basic undertakings were enshrined in the Treaty: the repudiation of the 
possession of nuclear weapons; the obligation to eliminate existing nuclear stocks; the 
adoption of measures to rid the world of nuclear weapons; the fostering of international 
co-operation in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy; and the provision of special 
assistance to developing countries to that end. The Treaty needed to be reviewed, however, 
in the light of present-day and future needs. Changes were necessary to make it equitable 
and non-discriminatory, with an equal obligation being placed on all the parties not to 
develop, manufacture or maintain nuclear weapons. Only if it were strengthened along those 
lines would the Treaty succeed in attracting universal accession. 
56. As a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, Colombia welcomed the moves made towards 
establishing other denuclearized zones in the world and was encouraged by the recent 
developments in that direction in the Middle East, developments which augured well for 
improved nuclear co-operation in that region and reinforced the peace process. 
57. Colombia regarded nuclear technology as an extremely valuable tool at the present 
time of transition towards becoming a developed society and had adopted some ambitious 
plans both to raise the profile of science and technology, increasing investment in that area 
fourfold, and to open up its economy to world markets through improved competitiveness. 
One of the results of its new policies was the creation of a Ministry of the Environment 
responsible for co-ordinating activities relating to conservation and environmental protection, 
especially in the energy field. 
58. Colombia's Institute for Nuclear Science and Alternative Energies (ESfEA), which had 
recently celebrated its thirty-fifth anniversary, was, thanks to the technical co-operation 
provided by the Agency, an efficient organization with well-trained staff. The Institute was 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 18 

engaged in technical co-operation projects in the areas of health, nutrition, industrial 
applications, radiation protection and training. In disseminating the benefits of nuclear 
technology, it was involved in technology transfer, research and development and the 
improvement of national economic competitiveness. 

59. Mr. JUAREZ TOLEDO (Guatemala) recalled the importance attached by his 
country to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a means of promoting national 
development. Its technical co-operation programme covered the fields of health, agriculture 
and quality assurance in industry. In view of the socio-economic level of the majority of the 
country's population, all projects had an appreciable social content and took account from 
the outset of environmental protection considerations. Workers subject to occupational 
exposure also benefited from a radiation protection programme which aimed to ensure 
optimal utilization of ionizing radiation and radiation generators. 
60. The General Directorate for Nuclear Energy had developed an ambitious project 
involving a specially designed set of structures for the implementation of activities within the 
framework of the Agency's technical co-operation and for the development of research 
contracts, co-ordinated research programmes and other projects within the ARCAL 
programme. One of the main structures was the Secondary Standards Dosimetry Laboratory 
designed in accordance with the Agency's requirements and recommendations. The 
laboratory, which contained highly sophisticated equipment obtained through technical 
co-operation with the Agency and other countries, had seen the addition during the year of 
three calibration bunkers. As of 1995, Guatemala intended to use its infrastructure, 
equipment and qualified staff to offer dosimetry and radiation protection services to the 
countries of Central America and the Caribbean. 
61. With regard to nuclear applications, a number of projects had been developed with 
a view to involving local institutions and companies interested in community development. 
Guatemala was keen to promote nuclear technologies and was grateful to the Agency for the 
assistance provided over the previous 15 years. The Agency was to be commended for its 
balanced distribution of resources and assistance to developing countries and, for its part, 
Guatemala would make every effort to pay its contribution to the TACF. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 19 

62. In the agricultural sector, nuclear techniques were being used in research on mutation 
breeding of sugar cane. Co-operative efforts were also being continued with institutions 
interested in improving the nutritive value and resistance of staple foodstuffs such as rice, 
corn and beans, thereby helping to combat malnutrition in the country. 
63. With regard to nuclear applications in the health sector, a department of nuclear 
medicine was being developed to provide in vitro and in vivo diagnosis and to produce 
reagents for radioimmunoassay and radiopharmaceuticals for diagnosis using gamma cameras. 
As a result, it had been possible to start setting up rural units in national hospitals within the 
country to improve medical services in those areas and avoid overcrowding of facilities in 
the capital. 
64. Under the Agency's auspices, a project had been initiated four years earlier to 
improve the quality of radiotherapy and to increase the number of treatment units. Through 
its activities the National Cancer Institute had helped considerably in providing low-income 
inhabitants of the country with access to radiotherapy. 
65. In the area of nuclear analytical techniques, a programme for monitoring soil to 
determine natural background radioactivity had been completed. It was hoped that the 
Agency would help with the modernization of a laboratory for activities such as elemental 
analysis, and the certification of agricultural exports as free from radioactive contamination. 
66. As to radiation protection, licences were being issued for operators of X-ray 
generating equipment and radiation facilities, and efforts were continuing to establish 
installations for the management and final disposal of radioactive waste. The Governmentfunded 
programme, which would involve the concentration of all radiation sources and other 
waste in the country, also called for the updating and monitoring of the national inventory 
of radiation sources in use. 
67. In conclusion, he welcomed the Agency's new Member States and expressed his 
satisfaction at the progress made in the area of non-proliferation through the ratification of 
the Tlatelolco Treaty by Argentina, Brazil and Chile and the imminent accession to it by 
Cuba, and also through the new inspection system established by Brazil and Argentina 
through ABACC. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 20 

68. Mr. VELAZQUEZ RODRIGUEZ (Peru) expressed his delegation's 
satisfaction with the activities carried out by the Agency reflected in both the Annual Report 
for 1993, and the report on the Agency's technical co-operation activities in 1993. 
69. Since the previous session of the General Conference Peru had taken the final steps 
in establishing an efficient and orderly public administration within the framework of a freemarket 
economy. The gross national product had shown an increase of 12.6% in the first 
six months of the year and the rate of inflation would be brought down to below 20% 
in 1994 and attain a single digit figure in 1995. Those results had been achieved only 
through the virtual eradication of terrorism and progress in the fight against drug trafficking. 
The measures adopted had enabled the country to make better use of the international 
technical co-operation offered by organizations such as the Agency. 
70. As a peace-loving nation, Peru had always attached particular importance to the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy, above all in those sectors which could bring benefit to the 
majority of the population - agriculture, industry and medicine. The Agency's techmcal 
co-operation programme played an essential role in technology transfer. His country also 
appreciated the extrabudgetary support provided by the United States of America and the 
United Kingdom which had enabled the Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute to implement 
important technical co-operation projects. 
71. His Government welcomed the priority attached by the Agency to human health 
programmes and programmes related to sustainable development and the environment. The 
Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute - in line with Agency policy - had given priority to 
projects with real socio-economic impact. He commended the Agency on approving the first 
model projects, which were of undoubted importance. 
72. Turning to activities in the nuclear field carried out in Peru with Agency assistance, 
he said that the task of training highly qualified personnel was continuing. A new course in 
nuclear engineering was being offered to more than 30 young graduates from various 
scientific and engineering disciplines. He welcomed the Agency's decision to approve 
additional assistance for the implementation of a new course in medical and instrumental 
physics for personnel in the country's various medical services. He invited countries of the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 21 

region to put forward - through the Agency - candidates to take part in the programme so 
that it could benefit the entire region. 

73. He reiterated his country's interest in continuing energy planning studies with a view 
to possible nuclear energy power generation and thanked both the Agency and the 
Government of the United States of America for the support they had given. 
74. Production of radioisotopes continued but some difficulties had been encountered in 
marketing them abroad. Initiatives were under way to establish a joint venture with 
international partners for the production and marketing of radioisotopes such as iodine-131, 
technetium-99 and iridium-192. Within the framework of those efforts, steps had been taken 
to intensify co-operation with the Argentine National Atomic Energy Commission. 
75. The eradication of terrorism had not only been welcomed by the population of Peru, 
but had also created a much safer and more conducive climate for the development of 
co-operation activities. Two Peruvian institutes currently involved in such activities - the 
Institute for Tropical and Upland Veterinary Research and the National Agricultural 
University - had been able to carry out their research without interruption. In the field of 
food irradiation, the necessary physical infrastructure for the first multipurpose irradiation 
plant in the country had been completed. The plant - due to start operating in 1995 - would 
be part of a national food marketing and distribution centre. As to the field of nuclear safety 
and radiation protection, Peru now had highly trained technicians and the necessary 
equipment to cope with any nuclear emergency or accident. Furthermore, the Government 
of Peru had decided to sign the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which would enhance and 
strengthen international co-operation and improve safety levels at all nuclear installations. 
76. Finally, the ARCAL programme deserved a special mention as it was of real benefit 
to the 17 participating countries and enabled institutions of the region to have expedient and 
easy, albeit still limited, access to technology transfer. 
77. Mr. SANDOVAL (Ecuador) said that, in keeping with its pacifist principles, 
his country fully supported the diverse applications of nuclear energy, which offered 
developing countries in particular a valuable tool for resolving their development problems 
in many different fields. It also commended the Agency for its efforts to conclude new 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 22 

safeguards agreements with countries throughout the world and encouraged it to persevere 
in that direction. Furthermore, it welcomed the efforts being made to attain universal 
accession to the NPT within a reasonable period of time, b"elieving that to be a legitimate 
aspiration for all the world's peoples. 

78. Cuba's recent decision to accede to the Tlatelolco Treaty, thereby formalizing the 
status of the Latin American and Caribbean region as the world's first densely populated 
nuclear-weapon-free zone, was very welcome. The Quadripartite Agreement between 
Argentina, Brazil, ABACC and the Agency, which had entered into force in March, also 
represented a step towards strengthening the non-proliferation regime. 
79. Efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa would be considerably 
furthered by the agreement reached by the group of experts of the United Nations and the 
OAU on the draft text of a Treaty establishing such a zone, the task of verification being 
assigned by the Treaty to the Agency. In that connection, South Africa's declaration of its 
intent to renounce the manufacture of nuclear weapons and share its nuclear capabilities with 
other countries for exclusively peaceful purposes was an interesting development. 
80. Regarding the application of safeguards in Iraq, the Director General had reported in 
reassuring terms on the constructive co-operation received from that country in pursuance 
of Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715. Such co-operation was most welcome and 
to be further encouraged. Efforts should also be maintained on the part of all those 
concerned in order to ensure the effective implementation of the Agency's safeguards 
agreement with the DPRK. 
81. Concerning the strengthening of the Agency's main activities, he said that Ecuador 
was firmly convinced of the need for an adequate balance between all the Agency's activities 
and stressed the political importance of the provision of technical assistance to the developing 
countries through technology transfer, which also had social and economic repercussions. 
Ecuador was grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had received in connection with a 
number of projects and programmes in diverse areas including research, health, agriculture, 
the environment, radiation protection, product evaluation and - perhaps of greatest interest 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 23 

for the national economy - mutation breeding in relation to staple food crops such as the 
potato and banana. 

82. Although its scope was unfortunately limited to land-based civilian facilities, the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety - adopted in June by 84 countries, including Ecuador nevertheless 
represented a landmark in international efforts to achieve the highest possible 
safety standards. In the field of radioactive waste management too, the elaboration of safety 
principles and standards leading to the adoption by consensus of an international convention 
would represent a significant step forward towards banishing once and for all the threat to 
mankind posed by such waste. 
83. Illicit trafficking in nuclear material was a problem that was assuming worrying 
proportions and was quite rightly included on the Conference's agenda. The Secretariat 
should collaborate with the Member States in collecting as much information as possible on 
that subject in order to establish the origins and probable destination of the material in 
question and to improve the efficiency of nuclear material accounting and control systems. 
84. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, he requested that greater consideration 
be given to qualified applicants from developing countries, which continued to be underrepresented 
at all levels on the Agency's staff. 
85. On the question of the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he reiterated his 
country's position that if the Board were enlarged, the relative proportions of its current 
composition should be preserved. Ecuador was also in favour of continuing to prohibit 
re-election under Article VLA.2(a) in order to ensure a more fluid and democratic 
representation on the Board. The designation of Board members was an issue that warranted 
detailed consideration of all the relevant facts, interests and proposals. 
86. Mr. ROMAN-MOREY (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the Caribbean), noted that the majority of OP ANAL's Member States had 
now signed the amendments to Articles 14, 15, 16, 19 and 20 of the Tlatelolco Treaty, which 
had been adopted during the seventh extraordinary session of OPANAL's General Conference 
in 1992 and were in the process of ratifying the Treaty. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 24 


87. During the past year St. Kitts and Nevis had signed the Treaty and, following the 
amendments that had been made, Argentina, Chile and Brazil had been able to ratify it. 
"Although the latest amendments that had been adopted altered the system of verification, the 
basic principles of the Treaty remained unchanged. Prior to ratifying the Tlatelolco Treaty, 
Argentina and Brazil had also signed a joint safeguards agreement with the Agency. 

88. To date, the Agency's Board of Governors had approved 24 safeguards agreements 
relating to the geographical area covered by the Treaty. The comprehensive safeguards 
agreements negotiated hitherto under Article 13 prohibited the use of nuclear materials for 
the production of any nuclear explosive device. 
89. The further consolidation and growing international stature of the Tlatelolco system 
was highly gratifying. Twenty-eight of the thirty-three States in the regional group were now 
full members of the system. Three had signed the Treaty and not yet ratified it, and only 
two had not signed. Moreover, Cuba's recent announcement of its intention to accede to the 
Treaty as a full member meant that the region would become the first densely populated area 
to be free of nuclear weapons. 
90. The task of the Treaty was only just beginning, although after 27 years of productive 
and difficult work the initial scepticism felt by many had proved unfounded and the Treaty 
now provided a model for the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in densely 
populated areas. OP ANAL was able to offer unique and valuable experience in that regard. 
91. As a valid international legal instrument of long-standing, its mandate respected by 
the major powers and almost universally applied within its region, the Tlatelolco Treaty, 
together with the system of peace, security and development that rested upon it, now ensured 
that the Latin American and Caribbean region played an ever-increasing role in the 
multilateral disarmament agenda. 
92. In conclusion, he reiterated his conviction that the problem of the non-proliferation 
of weapons of mass destruction at regional and global level required an integral and 
comprehensive approach that was balanced and non-discriminatory, so as to prevent any 
hindrance of the full expansion of advanced dual-use technologies for exclusively peaceful 
purposes. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 25 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXVIII)/3 and 28) 

93. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1989 the Conference had approved a 
procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate or candidates from 
a particular area, no secret ballot would be held; balloting would only take place for areas 
where no candidate had been agreed upon. That procedure considerably facilitated the 
rational use of the Conference's time. 
94. Accordingly, he proposed - and it was agreed by the Conference - that Rule 79 of the 
Rules of Procedure, which provided that elections to the Board should be by secret ballot, 
should be suspended in respect of the areas for which agreement had been reached. 
95. Under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, the presiding officer had to indicate to the 
General Conference those elective places on the Board which had to be filled. In that 
connection, he drew attention to document GC(XXXVIII)/28 and said that agreement had 
been reached among the Member States in all areas except Africa. There were two seats to 
be filled for that area, and more than two candidates for those seats were listed. A secret 
ballot would therefore have to be held in respect of that area. 
96. He assumed that the General Conference wished to elect Brazil, Mexico and Uruguay 
to the three seats for Latin America. 
97. Brazil. Mexico and Uruguay were duly elected. 
98. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect Spain 
and Turkey to the two seats for Western Europe. 
99. Spain and Turkey were duly elected. 
100. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect the 
Slovak Republic to the seat for Eastern Europe. 
101. The Slovak Republic was duly elected. 
102. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect 
Pakistan to the seat for the Middle East and South Asia. 
103. Pakistan was duly elected. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 26 

104. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect 
Thailand to the seat for South East Asia and the Pacific. 
105. Thailand was duly elected. 
106. The PRESIDENT assumed that the General Conference wished to elect 
Algeria, from the area of Africa, to fill the so-called "floating" seat. 
107. Algeria was duly elected. 
108. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to proceed with a vote by 
secret ballot for the two seats for Africa. 
109. A secret ballot was held to fill the two seats for Africa. 
110. At the suggestion of the President, a member of the Malaysian delegation and a 
member of the United Kingdom delegation were appointed as tellers. 
111. The PRESIDENT, noting that the counting of the votes would take some time, 
suggested that the General Conference should resume the general debate until the results 
could be announced. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(resumed) 

112. Mr. SHTEINBERG (Ukraine) said that in accordance with the 16 July 1990 
Declaration of Sovereignty of Ukraine and the Declaration of the Supreme Soviet on 
24 October 1991 regarding Ukraine's non-nuclear-weapon status, Ukraine was determined 
to become a State without nuclear weapons. The practical steps taken by the Ukrainian State 
confirmed that it had de facto embarked on the path of achieving non-nuclear-weapon status 
and was approaching the attainment of that goal. The most recent stages in that process had 
been the Tripartite Declaration signed on 14 February 1994 by the Presidents of Ukraine, 
Russia and the United States of America and the decision taken by the Ukrainian Parliament 
on 3 February 1994 to withdraw its reservation in respect of Article V of the Lisbon Protocol 
and to exchange instruments of ratification of the START Treaty. Strategic missiles were 
being dismantled and nuclear warheads were being sent to Russia according to schedule, and 
Ukraine had the right to expect that the nuclear-weapon States would make greater 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 27 

disarmament efforts and also assist Ukraine through deeds - not just words - in the process 
of achieving non-nuclear-weapon status. 

113. The international non-proliferation regime based on the NPT was of crucial 
importance for ensuring global security and stability. The Board of Governors had approved 
an agreement the previous week between Ukraine and the Agency for the application of 
Agency safeguards to all nuclear material used in all peaceful nuclear activities within the 
territory, under the jurisdiction or under the control of Ukraine. That event was a very 
important part of the process of his country's accession to the NPT and achieving nonnuclear-
weapon status. 
114. Despite an extremely difficult economic situation, Ukraine was taking practical steps 
to minimize the time needed for the start of safeguards implementation. Preparation of the 
initial inventory of nuclear materials was near completion, the installation of containment and 
surveillance equipment had begun and other practical measures connected with the placing 
of peaceful nuclear activities under safeguards were being taken. Ukraine appreciated the 
assistance and support provided in that area by Sweden, Finland, the United States of 
America, Japan, Hungary and other countries. 
115. Document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/6 gave an idea of the significant progress being made 
with regard to international co-operation in nuclear and radiation safety, which was 
occupying an increasingly important place in the Agency's programmes. His delegation was 
generally pleased with the information presented in that document. 
116. In recent years, serious efforts had been made to assess the safety of nuclear power 
plants in countries of Central and Eastern Europe and the former USSR. The Agency's 
Secretariat had played an exceptional role in those efforts and an international consensus was 
gradually emerging with regard to the safety of plants of Soviet design. It was important that 
that consensus be based on a realistic assessment of both their strong and their weak points. 
There was a growing realization that no amount of assistance could resolve the entire 
complex of existing problems - there was a need for close co-operation and collaboration 
between East and West in the field of nuclear safety and for assistance in the establishment 
of infrastructures capable not only of launching, but also of sustaining programmes for the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 

page 28 

enhancement of nuclear power plant safety. Clearly, such problems could not be resolved 
quickly - a long period of painstaking effort would be necessary, not so much for resolving 
technical issues as for making radical economic and administrative changes and for 
developing nuclear regulatory regimes. It was essentially a question of creating a nuclear 
safety culture on a national scale, and it would be Utopian to expect rapid results. The 
Western specialists who had initiated the development of the nuclear safety culture 
philosophy knew very well how slow that process had been in their own countries. 

117. Nuclear power played a significant role in Ukraine's energy production. In 1993, 
nuclear power plants had generated 73 800 million kW-h of electricity, representing 32.9% 
of all the electricity generated in Ukraine that year. The proportion of electricity production 
attributable to nuclear power was still growing. However, nuclear power was in a critical 
situation. With the pricing policy in Ukraine, nuclear power plants could not recover the full 
cost of producing electricity. The payments crisis had led to a shortage of financial resources 
and to a curtailment of the already extremely limited activities for enhancing plant safety. 
Ukraine's nuclear power plants were not in a position to pay staff salaries on time and in 
full. To be quite frank, at present it was not a matter of enhancing safety, but of struggling 
to maintain it at its existing level. 
118. With Ukraine's uncertain economic situation, it was impossible to make a firm 
forecast regarding possible power supply sources in the near future, which in turn meant that 
no accurate forecast could be made regarding the closure of different units for reconstruction 
work or decommissioning. In that connection, the decision taken at the G-7 summit in 
Naples regarding the need to shut down the Chernobyl plant raised many issues for his 
country. The Government of Ukraine had stated many times that the question of 
decommissioning certain units at the Chernobyl plant would be resolved in the light of the 
socio-economic problems which might arise as a result of the cessation of operations at one 
or the other unit and with nuclear safety as the primary consideration. The only technical 
approach possible in preparing for important safety-related decisions had to be based on the 
results of the current safety reassessment of each unit at the Chernobyl plant and of the 
current assessment of the economic resources necessary for ensuring their safety. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 29 

119. All work relating to the safety of the operating units at Chernobyl was being done by 
Ukraine alone, without any support from the international community. Moreover, a 
shutdown of the Chernobyl plant in its entirety - called for by some delegates in their 
statements - was impossible, and talk of a shutdown was technically nonsensical. For 
example, one could not close down a storage facility for spent nuclear fuel and it was equally 
impossible to shut down the world-famous "sarcophagus". 
120. Ukraine had signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and would take measures to 
maintain and enhance the safety of all its nuclear facilities as provided for in the Convention. 
However, sufficient financial resources could be ensured for that purpose only after the 
economic situation had stabilized. In signing the Convention, Ukraine was fully aware of 
its responsibility for the safety of the nuclear power plants under its jurisdiction and 
recognized all the difficulties and the length of the path to be traversed before it could fully 
comply with the requirements of the Convention. However, Ukraine was determined to 
follow that path. The Convention was the most important step towards achieving a 
harmonized global regime for nuclear safety. The world community had acquired an 
important instrument for the regulation and enhancement of nuclear safety. The Convention 
was of particular importance for countries which did not yet have their own nuclear 
legislation, including Ukraine, and it was to be hoped that it would enter into force without 
significant delay. 
121. The Ukrainian delegation welcomed the adoption of the new Basic Safety Standards, 
which should provide a good basis for the development of national regulations for protection 
against ionizing radiation and the safety of radiation sources. 
122. It also welcomed the significant progress made in the development of standards for 
radioactive waste management. That had always been a more complex issue from the public 
acceptance point of view than any other in the nuclear field, and it was therefore important 
to proceed on the basis of an international consensus. The adoption of the Safety 
Fundamentals document "The Principles of Radioactive Waste Management" would 
undoubtedly be an important step towards such a consensus, and the process of approving 
that document should be completed at the December session of the Board of Governors. The 
next step should be a convention on radioactive waste management, the preparation of which 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 30 

Ukraine fully supported. He called upon the Director General to take the appropriate action. 
A convention based on an international consensus would make it easier to reach agreement 
on radioactive waste management issues in individual countries and would facilitate 
international co-operation, including co-operation relating to the concept of regional storage 
facilities. 

123. His delegation supported the Agency's activities relating to the establishment of a 
comprehensive regime of civil liability for nuclear damage and accepted the basic principles 
of such a regime, recognizing the need for Ukraine's nuclear facilities to be covered. A bill 
currently before the Ukrainian Parliament on the use of nuclear energy and radiation 
protection contained provisions establishing the exclusive and absolute liability of the operator 
for compensation for nuclear damage and also the standards, regulatory conditions and time 
limits for such compensation. At the same time, when considering the real possibility of 
Ukrainian participation in such a regime, one had to bear in mind the present economic and 
financial situation in Ukraine and the lack of an insurance market, of an adequate 
compensation system and of appropriate legislation there. In addition, the question of joining 
the regime was connected with the completion of the task of revising the Vienna Convention 
and the development of a convention on supplementary funding. A number of delegates had 
called for immediate accession to the Vienna Convention. However, accession without the 
creation of proper national legislative and financial structures would lead only to a fictitious 
extension of the Convention's coverage. 
124. Elimination of the consequences of the accident at the Chernobyl nuclear power plant 
was one of the Ukrainian Government's priority tasks. Fortunately, the matter remained one 
of interest to international organizations, including the Agency. In March, for example, 
experts from many countries had taken part in an international symposium, organized with 
the support of NEA/OECD, at which the problems of ensuring the safety of the former 
Unit No. 4 at Chernobyl had been discussed. In the course of a very open discussion, a 
general assessment had been made of the status of that unit, the basic problems had been 
defined and different regulatory approaches to those problems examined. He looked forward 
to further fruitful co-operation with experts from other countries in resolving the important 
and scientifically interesting safety issues relating to the unit that had been destroyed by the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 31 

accident and welcomed the Secretariat's willingness to provide Ukraine with expert support 
for safety assessments. 

125. His delegation endorsed the Agency's programme and budget for 1995-96. 
Unfortunately, the severe economic situation in Ukraine had prevented it from paying its 
arrears of contributions to the Regular Budget, which were due to the fact that the former 
Soviet Union had not paid part of Ukraine's contributions for 1991 and to the unfair increase 
of approximately 60% the previous year in Ukraine's base rate of assessment within the 
United Nations and consequently within the Agency. The Ukrainian delegation was taking 
appropriate steps within the United Nations. The recommendations formulated at the fiftyfourth 
session of the Committee on Contributions would be discussed at the forty-ninth 
session of the General Assembly, and he hoped that would result in a gradual reduction in 
Ukraine's assessment rate from 1.87% to 1.09% by 1997. He also hoped that a similar 
decision would then be taken within the Agency. However, such a reduction was really 
needed at the present time - while Ukraine was still in serious difficulties - rather than in the 
future, however close that future might be. 
126. In conclusion, he said that Ukraine greatly appreciated and endorsed the Agency's 
varied activities aimed at strengthening international co-operation in the peaceful utilization 
of nuclear energy and would do all it could to help resolve the extremely important issues 
facing the Agency. 
127. Mr. MIKHALEVITCH (Belarus) said that his country remained firmly 
committed to the objective of achieving non-nuclear status, set forth in its new Constitution. 
In 1992, all tactical nuclear weapons had been withdrawn from Belarus and strategic nuclear 
warheads were currently being transferred to Russia, pursuant to the bilateral agreement 
between Russia and Belarus. In 1993 Belarus officially acceded to the NPT as a non-nuclearweapon 
State and to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
128. Furthermore Belarus had decided to conclude a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency. Agency representatives had visited Belarus in 1993 to examine the organizational, 
technical and legal aspects of implementing the agreement. Belarus was grateful to Japan and 
Sweden for their assistance in co-ordinating and planning a State system of accounting for 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 32 

and control of nuclear material, as well as its physical protection. He hoped that the United 
States would also participate, and that the obligations would be met on time, thereby enabling 
Belarus to implement the safeguards agreement successfully. 

129. In view of the importance of the development of bilateral and multilateral relations in 
connection with the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, nuclear safety and radiation protection 
of the public, Belarus had signed an agreement within the framework of the CIS on cooperation 
in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and it was preparing an 
agreement with Poland on an early warning system for nuclear accidents. In addition it was 
preparing a similar agreement with Lithuania, as well as a co-operation agreement with the 
United States of America. 
130. Following its independence Belarus had experienced grave economic difficulties. It 
was extremely poor in fuel resources and in order to improve the situation and reduce 
dependence on imports, it would be necessary to update the existing thermal power plants 
using modern combined-cycle plants and to construct new units. 
131. Belarus attached great importance to co-operation with the Agency in areas including 
energy planning research, the creation of an appropriate infrastructure and a normative-legal 
basis ensuring nuclear safety and radiation protection, as well as the development of methods 
for the storage and disposal of radioactive waste. It welcomed the efforts of the Agency, the 
UNDP, the European Commission and WANO to increase the safety of nuclear facilities and 
to strengthen the nuclear safety and radiation protection infrastructure in countries of the 
former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe. 
132. With regard to the Chernobyl accident, he said that Belarus had been the country that 
had been the most affected from the aftermath. It could not cover alone the direct and 
indirect costs resulting from the accident, estimated at $45 000 million for the period 
1986-2015. In that connection, he wished to thank the Agency for its assistance, and 
expressed the hope that it would continue. Belarus had submitted projects related to the 
Chernobyl accident to the Agency's technical assistance programme for 1995-96 and hoped 
that those projects would be included in the programme, particularly as Belarus had not until 
recently - required assistance from the TACF. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 33 

133. His country was pleased to note that international organizations, including the 
European Community, UNESCO and WHO were also providing assistance to mitigate the 
consequences of the Chernobyl accident, and welcomed the fact that the issues of nuclear 
power safety and energy planning in Eastern Europe and in other Member States were being 
addressed by the World Bank and the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development. 
However, in some cases there was a lack of co-ordination, and in order to make good use 
of the Agency's resources, the Secretariat should co-ordinate its technical assistance 
programme more efficiently with national and international projects, where possible. 
134. Recalling the 1990 International Chernobyl Project, experts had agreed that the 
methodology employed in studying the consequences of the Chernobyl accident in Russia, 
Ukraine and Belarus had, on the whole, corresponded to international standards. Scientists 
and specialists in Belarus had accumulated a vast amount of knowledge which would be of 
interest to the entire world community. However, further internationally co-ordinated 
scientific research was required to obtain a better understanding of the consequences of 
radioactive contamination and radiation exposure in order to improve protection for people 
all over the world. He therefore called for the creation of an international group of experts 
to analyse and summarize the results of all studies pertaining to the Chernobyl accident, and 
to produce a special final report to be made available to the world community. For its part, 
Belarus was ready to co-operate fully in that task. 
135. As a result of the country's acute economic situation, worsened by expenditure to 
mitigate the after-effects of the Chernobyl accident, Belarus had not been able to meet its 
budgetary obligations. The recommendation of the Committee on Contributions to the United 
Nations General Assembly was for Belarus's contribution to be reduced from 0.48% to 
0.28 %. Belarus hoped that that recommendation would be adopted by the General Assembly 
and that the Agency would follow that example. 
136. In spite of the fact that its per capita GNP was less than one third of that of the fifteen 
most developed countries, and there was no significant nuclear power activity in the country, 
Belarus was in the unshielded group of countries with regard to its contributions towards the 
safeguards component of the Regular Budget. His country felt that it should be transferred 
to the group of shielded countries. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.7 
page 34 

137. Finally, the General Conference had every reason to take a positive view of the 
Agency's work in 1993, and to approve the annual programme and budget. He was 
confident that the Agency would enjoy continued success in uniting and co-ordinating the 
efforts of its Member States to achieve broader utilization of nuclear energy in the interests 
of peace, health and welfare. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 

5 January 1995 

GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 22 September 1994, at 3.15 p.m. 


President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

8 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 
(resumed) 1 -3 

7 General debate and annual report for 1993 (resumed) 4-85 

Statements by the delegates of the following States: 

Jordan 4-13 
Iraq 14-21 
Costa Rica 22-24 
Denmark 25-37 
Kenya 38-47 
Mongolia 48-54 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 55-60 
Paraguay 61 -70 
Kuwait 71 -76 
Yemen 77-85 

30 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 86 - 87 

GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 I/Rev.2. 
94-03934 (X) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 2 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

DPRK 
EBRD 
G-24 
NPT 
RCA 

TCF 
Hatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 

Abbreviations used in this record 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
Group of Twenty-Four 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 3 

ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(XXXVIII)/3) 
(resumed) 

1. The CHAIRMAN announced the results of the ballot to the Conference. 
2. In the election of two members from the area of Africa the result was: 
Abstentions: 6 

Valid votes: 168 

Required majority: 43 

Votes obtained: 

Ghana: 72 

Morocco: 73 

South Africa: 1 

Sudan: 22 

3. Having obtained the required majority. Ghana and Morocco were elected to the 
Board. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1993 (GC(XXXVIII)/2 and Corr.l) 
(resumed) 

4. Mr. AL ZUBI (Jordan) welcomed the fact that ten new States had joined the 
Agency since the previous session and said that the world was witnessing a turn of events 
which gave cause to hope that the spectre of war would soon disappear and that countries 
would no longer feel the need to acquire weapons of mass destruction. 
5. After expressing the hope that peace in the Middle East would be lasting and 
comprehensive, he endorsed the Agency's efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
that region and, recalling that in the resolution on the application of IAEA safeguards in the 
Middle East (GC(XXXVII)/RES/627), adopted unanimously at the previous General 
Conference, had called on all countries of the region to place all their nuclear activities under 
Agency safeguards without delay, stressed that that had not yet been done. 
6. With regard to safeguards, disarmament and nuclear safety, his delegation wished to 
make a number of comments. First, by displaying partiality concerning sensitive issues such 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 4 

as nuclear weapons and the application of safeguards, the Agency and the United Nations 
system as a whole risked losing their credibility. Second, the situation on the Korean 
Peninsula was worrying and all the countries of the region should collaborate to find a 
solution to the problem. Third, the positive climate that was apparent from the Director 
General's report on the implementation of Security Council resolutions 687, 707 
and 715(1991) relating to Iraq was very encouraging, and it was to be hoped that that would 
lead to the alleviation of the Iraqi people's suffering. Fourth, Jordan supported all the calls 
that had been made for vertical and horizontal extension of the safeguards system, with a 
view to achieving a world free of nuclear weapons where the risk of proliferation no longer 
existed. Fifth, he commended the efforts that had been made at the international level to 
draw up the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which his delegation regarded as an effective 
means of avoiding nuclear accidents. 

7. Radioactive waste management was a delicate and complex issue requiring lengthy 
consideration. The worrying factor was that the space needed for regional repositories was 
only likely to be available in countries that did not have the benefit of nuclear energy and had 
no interest in storing waste on their territory. The future of stored waste and its long-term 
effects were difficult to predict. Nature might be subject to transformations leading to 
disasters whose consequences would be felt for generations and which international 
assistance, however considerable, would be unable to rectify. His delegation therefore 
considered that each country should be responsible for the waste it produced and that 
increased efforts should be made to develop scientific methods and suitable standards and 
apply them effectively. His delegation could approve the draft resolution submitted by 
Venezuela on behalf of the Group of 77. 
8. The food and agriculture sector was a vital part of Jordan's economy, and several 
projects were in hand for its development and improvement. His delegation greatly 
appreciated the activities of the Agency and other international organizations with regard to 
the practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries, and renewed its appeal 
to the Agency to establish an agricultural research centre in the Middle East concerned with 
the use of nuclear techniques. Because of its diversity, the region was a suitable base for 
research and scientific studies that would be of interest to all Member States. Jordan also 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 5 

welcomed efforts to investigate the possible use of nuclear energy for seawater desalination, 
as it suffered from water shortages and was constantly drawing on its scarce underground 
reserves. 

9. For several years the General Conference had been considering changing the 
distribution of seats in the Board of Governors with a view to ensuring fairer representation 
for the two important areas of the Middle East and South Asia, and Africa, but efforts made 
in that direction had so far failed. The Agency currently had 121 Members as against 
only 60 in 1957. Furthermore, the technological progress achieved in South and South East 
Asia, as well as in Latin America, and the political developments that had occurred in the 
world were sufficient grounds for increasing the number of members of the Board and thus 
ensuring greater harmony within the Agency. 
10. Despite the Agency's considerable efforts to improve the representation of developing 
countries among the staff of the Agency's Secretariat, the number of staff members drawn 
from those countries remained very low. No Jordanian had ever been appointed to a 
higher-grade post although many qualified candidates had been nominated. His delegation 
hoped that the developing countries would soon be able to feel that they were represented 
equitably in the various posts in the Secretariat, which was sure to have the effect of 
promoting harmony and collaboration. 
11. He thanked the Agency for the assistance it had provided to Jordan in connection with 
various national and regional projects, in particular the establishment of the necessary 
infrastructure for the peaceful application of nuclear energy, radiation safety and 
environmental protection. Jordan was relying on the Agency for the establishment of a 
Jordanian centre for nuclear research and training. It welcomed the projects proposed for 
the West Asia region which, taken as a whole, met the latter's developmental expectations 
and needs. In order to accelerate the region's development, Jordan requested the Agency and 
the countries concerned to re-examine the possibility of establishing, as Jordan and others had 
proposed in 1986, a regional co-operation programme on the lines of existing regional 
programmes (RCA, AFRA, ARCAL). 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 6 

12. His delegation could approve the Agency's Annual Report for 1993 and its 
Programme and Budget for 1995 and 1996, while re-emphasizing the need to fund technical 
co-operation and assistance through predictable resources instead of depending on voluntary 
contributions. In that way, all States would contribute on an equitable basis to development 
efforts. 
13. Reaffirming his support for the Agency's efforts to accelerate and enhance the 
contribution of nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity worldwide, he said his 
Government undertook to pay its contribution to the Agency's budget for 1995, together with 
8% in the form of assessed programme costs. 
14. Mr. AL-KITAL (Iraq) said his country had accepted Security Council 
resolution 687(1991) despite the damage it was causing to the Iraqi people. It had taken all 
the measures called for in paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of the resolution whose implementation 
the Agency had been required to monitor. To that end, 533 inspectors from 35 countries 
constituting 26 teams, had been to Iraq, where they had carried out 241 inspection days 
during which they had made 634 visits, of which 61 were surprise visits, 210 were visits to 
sites unconnected to the nuclear programme and 100 were visits to sites where there were 
materials or equipment intended for the programme. With logistical and technical support 
from Iraq, the inspection teams had taken over 700 samples, performed hundreds of 
radioactivity checks and carried out two radioactivity measuring campaigns by helicopter at 
five sites. 
15. In his statement to the Board of Governors on 12 September, the Director General 
had expressed his satisfaction at the fruitful collaboration between the Iraqi authorities and 
the Agency, saying that significant progress had been made during the preceding few months 
in the Agency's activities in Iraq under the relevant Security Council resolutions and that the 
correctness and completeness of the information provided in October 1993 by the Iraqi 
authorities on foreign sources of supplies and technical advice had been verified with the 
assistance of the Member States concerned. In his statement to the General Conference on 
19 September, the Director General had reaffirmed that with the Iraqi authorities' 
collaboration the Agency had been able to perform its tasks pursuant to the relevant Security 
Council resolutions, and had also said that the Agency was satisfied that the scope of Iraq's 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 7 

former nuclear weapons programme was now well understood and that it no longer had any 
capability for the production of nuclear weapons. The mission entrusted to the Agency in 
paragraphs 11, 12 and 13 of resolution 687 had thus been accomplished. 

16. In November 1991 Iraq had submitted forms containing the information required 
under the monitoring plan established by Security Council resolution 715(1991). The forms 
had been changed several times by the Agency before a final version was adopted and Iraq 
had made certain suggestions which had been welcomed. The final version had not been sent 
to Iraq until March 1994. Although it had only had two weeks to complete and return the 
forms, Iraq had in that time sent diskettes containing information on 24 sites, representing 
thousands of forms and tens of thousands of items of information. In order to help the 
Agency speed up its work, a new update of the information had been carried out in April and 
more recently in July. Iraq had also helped the Agency's teams implement the ongoing 
monitoring and verification plan by installing cameras, taking water and soil samples and 
performing aerial surveys. The ongoing inspection measures were in place, the Baghdad 
Monitoring and Verification Centre was ready and the Director General had announced in 
his statement to the Board of Governors on 12 September that the Agency had been 
maintaining a continuous presence in Baghdad since 23 August. 
17. Since the beginning of 1992 Iraq had collaborated wholeheartedly with the Agency's 
teams, as evidenced in their reports, which had helped the Agency execute tasks and 
accomplish its mission pursuant to paragraphs 12 and 13 of part C of Security Council 
resolution 687. As Iraq had fulfilled its obligations pursuant to resolution 707, the Agency 
should request the Security Council to allow Iraq to exercise its rights once more as a party 
to the NPT and resume its nuclear activities in accordance with the Treaty and the safeguards 
system. His delegation urged the General Conference and the Agency to take measures to 
that effect and to restore technical assistance to Iraq, which had been suspended since 
September 1990. 
18. The Security Council resolutions authorized Iraq to use and import radioisotopes for 
medical purposes but the procedure to be followed was so complicated that the goods were 
often considerably delayed, which prevented medical establishments from providing services 
to patients needing those items. Moreover, the quantities received were less than those that 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 8 

had been ordered and only covered 10% of Iraq's actual needs. He hoped the General 
Conference would devote more attention to the issue and arrange for a less complicated 
procedure to be introduced to enable Iraq to obtain the products in question for its patients 
without delay. 

19. Paragraph 14 of Security Council resolution 687 stated that "actions to be taken by 
Iraq in paragraphs 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 of the present resolution represent steps towards 
the goal of establishing in the Middle East a zone free from weapons of mass destruction..." 
As Iraq had fulfilled its obligations under the paragraphs mentioned, the Agency and other 
parties concerned should make a serious effort to implement the terms of paragraph 14 by 
urging all the countries of the region to accede to the NPT and submit to full-scope Agency 
safeguards. The Agency should first place all the Israeli nuclear facilities under safeguards 
and purge any nuclear weapons from the region, or it would remain prey to instability and 
a hotbed of local conflicts. 
20. In view of the positive situation brought about by the fruitful collaboration between 
the Agency and Iraq in implementing the Security Council resolutions, it should be possible 
to look forward with confidence to a future in which Iraq would exercise all its rights with 
regard to the peaceful use of nuclear energy in accordance with the Agency's safeguards 
system, and in which positive steps would be taken in the Middle East and the rest of the 
world to strengthen that system and apply it in all States without exception, in order to 
promote the principles of non-proliferation and make them universal. Furthermore, urgent 
steps should be taken to achieve a complete ban on nuclear testing and to control the 
production of fissile materials, in order to provide security guarantees to non-nuclear weapon 
States and make it possible, within the foreseeable future, to live in a world without nuclear 
weapons. 
21. He had hoped to end his statement on that positive note, but found himself obliged 
to say a few more words. The General Conference had before it a draft resolution on Iraq. 
It was clear on reading the draft that its content was purely political and had no connection 
with reality, since it did not even take account of what had been said by the Director 
General, the inspection teams and the Action Team. Depriving Iraq of its right to vote and 
even, as some countries apparently had proposed, preventing it from submitting draft 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 9 

resolutions, simply demonstrated intent to harm Iraq and involve the Agency in political 
issues unrelated to its mission which ran contrary to its principles and its Statute. He was 
sure that those responsible would regret it, for by their actions they would harm the Agency 
far more than Iraq. 

22. Mr. GONGORA-TREJOS (Costa Rica) recalled that the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy had started in December 1942 at the University of Chicago when 
Enrico Fermi built the first nuclear reactor. Although that event had been one of the most 
significant in the history of man's scientific and technological development, it had remained 
practically unknown to the world at large. In 1945, nuclear energy had been used for the 
first time for non-peaceful purposes at Hiroshima and Nagasaki. By its very nature, that 
event had had considerable repercussions in the world. Since then, possible applications of 
nuclear energy had engendered distrust. What was more, the negative image created by the 
use of nuclear weapons had been reinforced by the nuclear and radiation accidents that had 
occurred. 
23. Scientific circles were very well informed of progress made in regard to nuclear 
safety and nuclear reactor operation, and those who worked in the field of the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy were not only aware of the advantages of that form of energy but also 
knew what the Agency was doing in the field of radiation protection. Unfortunately, not 
much had been done to keep the general public informed, and even if they were, it would 
serve little purpose if mankind was being threatened by the Damoclean sword of nuclear war. 
24. Effort should be devoted to developing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. This 
form of energy, which had already brought and could continue to bring considerable 
advantages to mankind, had met with public hostility because of its potential non-peaceful 
uses. For that reason, Costa Rica, which had a long democratic tradition and which had 
demonstrated its peaceful convictions by abolishing its army in the fifties, called on all the 
Governments represented at the General Conference not only to extend the NPT but also to 
enhance it in the light of the experience acquired in the 25 years since the Treaty's entry into 
force, so that - once the nuclear danger had been eliminated - all the peoples of the world 
could devote themselves to research in the nuclear field and benefit from the advantages that 
nuclear energy could bring. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 10 

25. Mr. B0JER (Denmark), associating himself fully with the statement made by 
the delegate of Germany on behalf of the European Union, said that the NPT continued to 
be the cornerstone of the non-proliferation regime. Denmark was pleased with the increase 
in the number of States which had acceded to the NPT, thereby making nuclear nonproliferation 
a universally accepted principle. It strongly favoured unconditional extension 
of the NPT in 1995 for an indefinite period. 
26. Denmark was deeply concerned about the situation with regard to the application of 
safeguards in the DPRK. The fact that more than 50 non-nuclear-weapon States which were 
party to the NPT had not yet concluded safeguards agreements as required under the Treaty 
was also a matter of concern. Although, with the exception of the newly-independent States, 
the outstanding agreements involved States with no significant nuclear activities, it was 
important for the credibility of the NPT and the safeguards system that all States comply with 
their obligations under Article HI. 
27. Denmark strongly supported all efforts aimed at enhancing the effectiveness and 
efficiency of the safeguards system. It was necessary to study ways of improving application 
of the safeguards system and facilitating the Agency's work in that respect. 
28. The increasing number of cases of illicit trafficking in nuclear material in recent 
months was a matter of grave concern. That problem called for urgent action. It was 
principally the responsibility of Governments to prevent such proliferation at source. 
Nevertheless, co-operation between Governments based on mutual trust was essential, and 
it was clear that the Agency also had an important role to play. 
29. Export and supply controls, already extensive, should be further strengthened. In that 
connection it was encouraging to note that the Nuclear Suppliers Group's guidelines on trade 
in nuclear-related goods and technology were becoming more and more widely accepted. 
Members of the Group now required that all current and future nuclear activities be 
submitted to Agency safeguards before authorizing any significant new supply. Denmark 
urged all other nuclear suppliers to make the application of full-scope safeguards a condition 
of supply. 

GC(xxxvmyoR.8 
page 11 

30. Turning to nuclear safety, a matter of great importance to his Government, he recalled 
that in 1985, a year before the Chernobyl accident, Denmark had decided not to include 
nuclear power in its energy planning because it felt that the problems of nuclear safety and 
waste management had not been resolved. That seemed even more valid at the present time 
given that many nuclear power plants were operating at a dangerously low safety level and 
that nuclear waste management left much to be desired. 
31. The Agency had an important role to play as technical adviser to the G-24. Denmark 
unreservedly supported the provision of assistance in nuclear safety to the States of Central 
and Eastern Europe and to the newly-independent States, to which it was contributing its full 
share. The Danish contribution to European Union assistance programmes was 
complemented by special voluntary contribution to the EBRD nuclear safety account and by 
monies allocated to bilateral assistance programmes. 
32. His Government felt it was extremely important to exploit the considerable energy 
saving potential in the countries concerned and to develop longer-term alternative energy 
supply strategies in order to reduce their energy dependence and encourage them to shut 
down unsafe reactors. 
33. Denmark supported the creation of a comprehensive and legally binding international 
safety regime. The adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety was a step forward and 
he paid tribute to the experts who had elaborated that document under the leadership of 
Mr. Domaratzki. Denmark would in fact have preferred the Convention to cover not just 
civil nuclear power plants but waste management as well. He hoped that the safety 
fundamentals for radioactive waste management would be adopted soon. At all events, work 
on drawing up a nuclear waste convention should start without delay. Denmark was on the 
whole satisfied with the outcome of the Diplomatic Conference. It had signed the 
Convention during the current session of the General Conference and would ratify it as soon 
as possible. He urged all other parties to do the same so that that important Convention 
could enter into force as soon as possible. An important aspect of the Convention was the 
commitment to institute appropriate procedures for consulting parties in the vicinity of a 
proposed nuclear installation insofar as they might be affected by that installation. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 12 

34. He also welcomed the agreement that had been reached on establishing a nuclear 
protocol within the framework of the European Energy Charter. That protocol, which would 
probably be signed by the end of the year, would cover the whole fuel cycle and would 
complement, without duplication, the work done in the context of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety. 
35. Strengthening and enhancing of the international nuclear liability regime remained a 
high priority. Denmark strongly supported the work of the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage and expressed the hope that it would be possible to reach a common 
solution on the outstanding questions in order to convene a diplomatic conference at an early 
date. Broad participation in the civil liability regime would undoubtedly lead to increased 
international co-operation on upgrading nuclear safety. It should be added that the widest 
possible accession to the present Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol was essential. 
36. Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's technical assistance activities, 
which continued to show substantial growth. It could accept the target of US $61.5 million 
for the TCF for 1995 and had already pledged its full voluntary contribution. 
37. In conclusion, he expressed his country's great appreciation and full support for the 
dedicated work of the Director General and his staff. Given the great demands made of the 
Agency's Secretariat, it was vital that the high level of professional qualification of its staff 
be maintained. 
38. Mr. NANJIRA (Kenya) said that his country would like first of all to thank 
the Director General and all his staff for their continuing efforts to promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy and to apply safeguards, particularly the measures which had been taken 
to meet the tough safeguards challenges faced by the Agency in recent years. 
39. Kenya was nonetheless deeply concerned about the cases of illicit trafficking in 
weapons-grade nuclear material reported recently by the media. The Agency should 
therefore intensify its efforts to strengthen the safeguards system in order to eliminate such 
trafficking and should endeavour to provide timely information to Member States on such 
cases. That would help dispel fears about illicit trafficking, especially within Member States 
which did not have direct access to accurate information on the matter. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 13 

40. Kenya wished to take the opportunity to congratulate sincerely the Government of 
South Africa on the new developments in that country which had opened up new possibilities 
for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the region. 
41. Kenya was highly appreciative of the Agency' s technical co-operation programme and 
other related programmes. Many developing countries, including Kenya, were facing 
innumerable socio-economic problems. The technical and socio-economic gap between the 
developed and the developing countries was continuing to increase year by year, particularly 
in Africa. That gap was due in part to global events which were far beyond the control of 
those countries. The Agency's efforts to reduce the technical gap were well known and 
Kenya was deeply appreciative of them, but it urged the Agency to increase its efforts to find 
lasting solutions. In that connection, he appealed to the developed countries to increase their 
financial support to the Agency for the promotion of technical co-operation. 
42. Kenya appreciated the considerable assistance provided to it by the United States, 
Spain, the United Kingdom, France and many other countries in the form of expert services, 
equipment and training in many areas of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It thanked 
them sincerely and asked them to increase their contributions towards Kenya's national 
development efforts. 
43. The Agency was also making a valuable contribution to the socio-economic 
development of Kenya, particularly in the agricultural sector, which was the mainstay of its 
economy. It was providing technical assistance within the framework of numerous ongoing 
projects which were expected to benefit the small-scale farmers in the long term. With regard 
to human health, the Agency was supporting several projects aimed at improving the health 
of the population. 
44. The Kenyan Nuclear Science Training Centre, which had been established several 
years previously with Agency assistance, continued to receive Agency support. As well as 
continuing to provide services in the application of nuclear analytical techniques, that Centre 
had remained a focal training point in that field, hosting regional and international training 
activities. In the field of non-destructive testing, Kenya had received considerable technical 
assistance from the Agency in the form of equipment, training and expert services, with the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 14 

result that services were now being provided not only to the public but also to the private 
sector. 

45. Since water was vital to the survival of mankind, he welcomed Agency initiatives to 
support Kenya's work on the use of isotopes to study various water resource problems. The 
Agency had given his country the opportunity of hosting several meetings and training 
activities since September 1993. It was sincerely grateful and would continue to place its 
facilities at the Agency's disposal whenever needed. 
46. Agency projects in the Africa region, implemented within the framework of AFRA, 
depended for their success both on Agency assistance and international co-operation. As the 
outgoing Chairman and active member of AFRA, Kenya was very grateful to France, Spain 
and other friendly countries which had continued to provide the financial resources and 
technical assistance necessary for implementation of several AFRA and national projects. 
He appealed especially for more financial support for the AFRA programmes in the new 
cycle. 
47. In conclusion, his delegation stressed that the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had 
revolutionized ways of resolving mankind's socio-economic problems. Nuclear energy was 
now being used for peaceful purposes in practically all fields and would play a decisive role 
in the future of mankind. The future uses of nuclear energy would be even more complex 
and challenging. Nevertheless, Kenya had confidence in the Director General and the entire 
staff of the Agency, who had made the Agency one of the most effective organizations in the 
United Nations system. 
48. Mr. GANBAATAR (Mongolia) thanked the Director General and staff of the 
Secretariat for their efforts to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to strengthen 
Agency safeguards. In particular, his delegation commended the Annual Report of the 
Agency for 1993 which highlighted the significant results it continued to achieve and 
demonstrated the competent and efficient manner in which it was managed. 
49. With preparations now under way for the 1995 NPT Extension Conference, Mongolia 
wished to see the universality of that important international legal instrument strengthened, 
and supported its indefinite extension. Consequently, it fully supported any initiative to that 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 15 

end. In that connection, it greatly appreciated the role played by the Agency in verifying the 
application of the NPT. It fully supported Agency safeguards and the programme launched 
by the Secretariat to strengthen them. 

50. Like the delegate of Sweden, he felt that non-proliferation efforts alone could not 
guarantee international peace and security and had to be backed up by verifiable disarmament 
measures. Mongolia welcomed the ongoing negotiations on a comprehensive test-ban treaty 
at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva. It also favoured early conclusion of a 
convention on fissile material and shared the grave concerns expressed by many delegations 
about the recent cases of illicit trafficking in nuclear material. 
51. Mongolia also shared the general concern for nuclear safety. It therefore welcomed 
the adoption of the Convention on Nuclear Safety in June 1994 which it intended to accede 
to in the near future. 
52. Mongolia strongly supported Agency efforts to establish nuclear weapon-free zones. 
Establishment of such zones was a major aim of Mongolia's foreign and security policies, 
and it had accordingly declared its territory a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
53. Mongolia continued to attach great importance to the Agency' s technical co-operation 
activities because they greatly facilitated utilization of nuclear science and technology to solve 
many of the problems in developing countries. The Agency's technical co-operation had 
enabled Mongolia to benefit from a major transfer of technology and experience for 
development purposes. Projects implemented included upgrading of the national information 
system, the establishment of nuclear analytical facilities for analysis of coal, mineral and ore 
samples, the application of nuclear techniques in agriculture, nuclear medicine, radiation 
protection and safety and groundwater hydrology, and the setting up of a radiobiological 
laboratory. The Agency was also helping Mongolia to establish gamma radiography and 
radiochemistry teaching laboratories and to assess the country's uranium potential. He hoped 
that the Agency would continue to support those projects. 
54. In conclusion, his country pledged its active support to the Agency in pursuing its 
goals of accelerating and enlarging the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world. 

GC(XXXVEI)/OR.8 
page 16 

55. Mr. OWN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), welcoming the return of South Africa 
to full participation in the international community, including the Agency, recalled that in 
resolution GC(XXXTV)/RES/540 the General Conference had requested the Director General 
to assess the costs of potable water production using nuclear plant and to compare them with 
desalination costs by other means. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya was among those countries 
which were finding it increasingly difficult to satisfy their basic water needs. It had 
therefore been one of the first countries to propose using nuclear energy to desalinate sea 
water and to provide support in that field in the hope of realizing that dream in the near 
future. It requested the Agency to devote more attention to activities related to nuclear 
desalination and to support the regional project to assist North African States in the use of 
nuclear reactors for water desalinatation (RAF/4/010) as well as activities concerning 
low- and medium-capacity nuclear reactors. In addition, his country called on all nations 
to provide financial and technical support to help achieve that worthy objective. 
56. While welcoming the increasing number of States acceding to the safeguards system, 
which would go a long way towards creating a safe and peaceful world freed from the threat 
of nuclear weapons, he noted that certain States, notably Israel, remained deaf to the repeated 
calls - in many resolutions - of the international community to place all its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards and the NPT. 
57. The world was aware of the danger posed to the Middle East and the rest of the globe 
by the Israeli nuclear arsenal. The international community - particularly the major powers should 
therefore take all necessary measures to have all Israeli nuclear installations placed 
under safeguards and to cause Israel to accede to the NPT. 
58. While all Member States stressed the importance of safeguards, the method of 
financing safeguards placed an excessive financial burden on some of them. It was essential 
that States with major nuclear activities contribute more to the costs involved in applying 
safeguards. 
59. With regard to document GC(XXXVIII)/14 on the restoration of technical assistance 
to Israel, his delegation recalled that the arguments put forward in that document bore no 
relation to the reason for the resolution depriving Israel of the right to Agency technical 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 17 

assistance, namely the criminal attack on the Iraqi reactor which had been condemned in 
numerous international resolutions. The Israeli regime had yet to demonstrate good 
intentions in that regard, above all in the nuclear energy field. It refused to conclude a 
safeguards agreement with the Agency, to allow its installations to be inspected and to sign 
the NPT. The international community should not encourage such an attitude by restoring 
technical assistance, but rather oppose it by every possible means. The peace referred to 
in the aforesaid document could not be achieved as long as the nuclear threat prevailed. 
That peace should be based on confidence, which could not be established without 
transparency and verification. Only then could a zone free of nuclear weapons and other 
weapons of mass destruction be created in the Middle East. 

60. Given the increasing number of countries interested in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy, serious consideration should be given to introducing the necessary 
modifications to Article VI of the Agency's Statute to ensure more equitable representation 
on the Board of Governors and enable countries to participate effectively in the decisions 
affecting them. 
61. Mr. PEYRAT (Paraguay), recalling that the two preceding years had witnessed 
both considerable progress and disappointing delays, said that the Agency should pursue its 
efforts to establish itself as the principal safety body in the use of nuclear energy in the 
international context. Relations between Paraguay and the Agency had been marked by 
intense activity and significant results. His delegation, which had been on the Board of 
Governors for the first time, felt that it had done good work during its period of office in 
constant liaison with the National Atomic Energy Commission. 
62. That Commission, which had been established in 1959, was now part of the National 
University and was composed of representatives from the Ministries of Foreign Affairs, 
Public Health and Social Welfare, Public Works and Communications, Mines and Energy, 
and Agriculture, as well as representatives from the Institute of Health Science Research and 
from the private sector. That direct connection with the National University had helped 
accomplish objectives concerning the promotion and control of nuclear applications. In view 
of the enormous hydroelectric potential of the country, priority had been given to applications 
in the fields of medicine, industry and agriculture rather than nuclear power. Courses had 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 18 

been organized to train specialists in nuclear medicine and the use of nuclear techniques. 
Furthermore, in collaboration with the Ministry of Agriculture, the use of radioimmunoassay 
methods in animal pathology had been promoted, and nuclear tracers had been used to 
determine the physical, hydrochemical and bacteriological properties of potable water. 

63. The Government was focusing its efforts on radiation protection and nuclear safety, 
the subject of increasing collaboration between the National Atomic Energy Commission and 
other establishments such as the National University. These activities would be further 
developed thanks to the technical and scientific co-operation agreements concluded in 
November 1993 between the Faculty of Exact and Natural Sciences and the National Atomic 
Energy Commission. A similar agreement had been concluded with the Faculty of Chemical 
Sciences in June 1994. Those legal instruments laid down rights and obligations with regard 
to the training of highly-qualified specialists. In that connection he recorded that the 
Vice-Chancellor of the National University in Asuncion had approved the Basic Safety 
Standards. 
64. Recapitulating the ongoing technical co-operation projects between the Agency and 
Paraguay and the activities in which Paraguay had participated within the framework of 
ARCAL projects and the projects planned for 1995-96, he said that technical and scientific 
co-operation agreements in the course of negotiation with Peru and the Nuclear Safety 
Council of Spain since May of that year would complement existing agreements with 
Argentina, Brazil and Chile. 
65. Control over radioactive material had been tightened to cover entry into the country 
of material for medical and industrial use. All the technical co-operation projects had been 
integrated into the medium-term programming system with provision for the necessary 
flexibility. 
66. A basic course on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy was being organized for 
journalists by the National Atomic Energy Commission and the UNDP in November that 
year. Paraguay thanked the Agency for its technical co-operation, which was of vital 
importance for the development of the country's priority sectors. Paraguay also continued 
to support regional co-operation efforts under the ARCAL programme - an important 

GC(XXXVEI)/OR.8 
page 19 

instrument for the application of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture, industry and 
research - for the regular provision of resources was necessary to ensure continuity. 

67. Reaffirming both its support for the Agency's work on applying treaties and 
agreements to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and its firm position regarding 
the dangerous situation resulting from non-compliance with safeguards agreements, the 
Paraguayan delegation again urged the DPRK to comply fully with its safeguards 
commitments. 
68. Paraguay supported efforts to draw up international standards and rules for the safe 
utilization of nuclear technology. It therefore welcomed the Convention on Nuclear Safety 
which had been adopted in June 1994 and would be putting its signature thereto. In addition, 
it was pleased with the efforts made by the Secretariat under the Programme 93+2 and 
progress made by the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage in its review of 
the Vienna Convention. It also commended countries not previously signatories of the NPT 
or the Tlatelolco Treaty which had now acceded to those Treaties, or declared their intention 
of doing so. 
69. Once again, his delegation expressed its continuing support for the Secretariat's efforts 
to improve the distribution of posts within the Secretariat, and in particular to increase the 
representation of all countries and women - with special reference to the developing 
countries - in higher and decision-making posts in all the technical and administrative areas. 
70. In conclusion, he commended the Director General on his competent and dedicated 
leadership, and also the Secretariat on the high level of efficiency with which it was 
executing its tasks. 
71. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said his country fully supported the Agency's 
activities in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and the maintenance of peace and 
security throughout the world. 
72. Shortage of drinking water was a particularly serious problem in countries such as 
Kuwait where water resources were scarce or non-existent. For that reason Kuwait, which 
was one of the most advanced countries in the field of seawater desalination technology using 
fossil fuel energy and which had provided several countries with technical assistance, could 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 20 

approve and support the research carried out by the Agency on the feasibility of using 
nuclear energy for desalination. 

73. With regard to the application of safeguards in the Middle East, the Kuwaiti 
delegation considered that, in view of the new political situation there, the need to apply the 
safeguards system and make the region a nuclear-weapon-free zone was becoming ever more 
urgent. It requested the Agency to intensify its efforts to that end and urge all the countries 
of the region to place their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. It also hoped that, 
once the Middle East had been declared a nuclear-weapon-free zone, it would proceed to the 
next stage which would be to eliminate all other kinds of weapons of mass destruction chemical, 
bacteriological or ballistic - and even to reduce conventional arsenals. 
74. As the issue of safeguards was closely linked to world peace and security, Kuwait 
endorsed any measure that might strengthen the safeguards system. The Agency had 
undoubtedly enlarged its experience of safeguards application during its operations in Iraq 
and the DPRK. As to the financing of safeguards, the current formula - due to expire at the 
end of 1995 - was out of date, inequitable and in need of complete revision. 
75. He drew attention to the highly important issue of the action taken by Iraq pursuant 
to the Security Council resolutions concerning it. What the Iraqi Government called 
collaboration did not emanate from sincere intentions, as shown by Iraq's aggressive 
behaviour towards the Agency and the Special Commission between May 1991 and the end 
of 1993. It was thanks to the firm stand taken by the international community and the 
constant pressure it had exerted that the Iraqi authorities had been forced to comply. If its 
intentions had been honourable from the outset, why had Iraq not accepted resolution 715 in 
October 1991 and only done so in November 1993? Why had collaboration been restricted 
to only a part of the many Iraqi obligations? What was the reason behind the Iraqi 
authorities giving some of their nuclear facilities names associated with their occupation of 
Kuwait - thus exposing their expansionist intentions - as could be seen from the list at the 
end of the report by the twenty-fifth inspection team. It was part of a premeditated plan on 
the part of the Baghdad regime to induce the Security Council to lift the embargo on Iraq's 
oil exports imposed under paragraph 22 of resolution 687, while it continued to violate the 
rest of its international obligations. Knowing the Iraqi leaders well, his delegation was quite 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 21 

sure that their collaboration was only temporary, and that they would not hesitate to expel 
the experts and the Special Commission once the Iraqi objectives were achieved, and then 
simply resume their nuclear activities. The Agency should handle the issue with great care 
and keep a close watch on activities in Iraq in the fixture. His delegation wished to thank the 
Agency for all its efforts in that regard. 

76. The Director General had been right to refer in his statement to the close link that 
existed between the Agency and the other organizations of the United Nations system, 
particularly in the case of Iraq, where the Agency was acting on the basis of a mandate from 
the Security Council and not within the framework of its safeguards system. In that regard, 
he pointed out that Iraq still refused to recognize the independence and sovereignty of Kuwait 
and its international borders, and was also refusing to collaborate with the International 
Committee of the Red Cross on freeing Kuwaitis held in Iraqi prisons. Moreover, Iraqi 
school books continued to describe Kuwait as the nineteenth province of Iraq. It was for 
those reasons in particular that the Security Council had just decided to maintain the sanctions 
against Iraq. He also noted that the Co-operation Council of the Arab States of the Gulf had 
adopted a firm stance on the issue, as shown by the statement of the Foreign Affairs 
Ministers of the Council's member states at their recent meeting in Jiddah, at which they had 
endorsed the Security Council's decision on sanctions. 
77. Mr. MUQBEL (Yemen) said that over the past three decades the Cold War 
had resulted in political and intellectual confrontations and groupings or in local or regional 
armed conflicts. Many countries had devoted considerable resources to protecting themselves 
against the risk of such conflicts, which had accelerated the nuclear arms race and restricted 
the funding of research and development, especially in the area of the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. Consequently, many developing countries had found it difficult to obtain the 
resources needed to implement their economic and social development programmes or to 
meet the basic needs of their populations. 
78. Since the end of the Cold War the international community had been moving towards 
a policy of detente and fruitful co-operation, which would enable the Agency to make further 
progress on the application of safeguards, the creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones and the 
strengthening of nuclear safety, as well as helping the developing countries derive the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 22 

maximum benefit from technical assistance and peaceful uses of nuclear energy as a means 
of boosting their national economies and meeting their populations' vital needs. 

79. The case for using nuclear energy instead of or to complement conventional energy 
sources, in order to meet increased energy requirements was already proven, and the 
developing countries were becoming increasingly aware of the need to make use of it, in 
order to accelerate their socio-economic development. The Agency had a vital role to play 
in enhancing mutual trust and co-operation among Member States with a view to establishing 
firmly the policy of international friendship, promoting development opportunities in various 
countries, and bringing together North and South. 
80. There was no doubt that many poor countries of the South continued to suffer the 
after-effects of colonization and economic and social underdevelopment, sometimes 
aggravated by demographic problems, with the result that a large part of their populations 
lived in poor conditions. International co-operation programmes should therefore be 
strengthened and the developing countries assisted with meeting their basic requirements for 
food, medical care and education. The specialized international organizations and donor 
countries should support the developing countries' efforts to make better use of various 
energy sources and improve their economic, social and cultural conditions. In that regard 
the Agency could play an important role in the area of technology transfer. 
81. Nuclear energy had become essential to the improvement of agricultural and industrial 
production, and to the development of medical and engineering techniques. It was thanks 
to the Agency that nuclear energy was used for peaceful purposes, and it would be for the 
Agency to find the necessary resources and methods for strengthening nuclear safety, 
controlling the production and use of nuclear material and handling radioactive waste. 
82. He expressed concern at the food and water shortages in some poor countries, 
particularly in Africa and West Asia, and urged the Agency to do its utmost to help those 
countries find the latest and least expensive means of investigating their underground water 
resources and treating and desalinating sea water. 
83. The Director General's visit to Yemen in December had expedited the formalities for 
it to become a member of the Agency. Yemen had also signed the NPT and endorsed the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 23 

establishment of a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East. The success 
of the Middle East peace negotiations was not only just a matter of continued dialogue. It 
was also necessary for all the parties concerned to agree to apply the safeguards system and 
declare the region free of weapons of mass destruction, including nuclear weapons. He 
trusted that the Agency would manage to convince all the parties involved that stability and 
security could only be assured if the region became a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 

84. Yemen belonged to the group of least developed Member States. Its efforts at 
political, economic and social development had been handicapped by lack of funds and 
resources, economic underdevelopment, political divisions and the effects of the Cold War. 
All that had weakened Yemen's infrastructure, held back the economic and social integration 
of different levels of its population and prevented it profiting from the use of modern 
techniques, including the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Since 1990, Yemen had 
been a united country based on democracy and respect for human rights. Despite the 
conflicts which had occurred, the country had returned to a state of political stability and 
security in May, enabling it to re-engage in development and investment activities. 
85. He announced that Yemen had completed Agency membership formalities and was 
proud to assume its responsibilities with regard to the Agency and its various programmes. 
At the same time, Yemen hoped to derive the greatest possible benefit from the Agency's 
experience and its technical assistance programmes and, in particular, was looking to the 
Agency and its Member States for help in establishing a national centre for peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. A secretariat had already been appointed to co-ordinate the 
centre's work with Agency services and with the associated national and regional bodies. 
ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 

86. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was currently 
represented on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members - Mr. Hamada 
(Tunisia) and Ms. Schick (Australia) - with Mr. Campuzano Piiia (Mexico) and Mr. Myck 
(Luxembourg) as alternates. As Ms. Schick was no longer available to serve on the 
Committee he proposed that Mr. Myck be elected as a member and that Mr. Nogueira Viana 
(Brazil) be elected as an alternate. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.8 
page 24 

87. Mr. Myck (Luxembourg) was elected as a member of the Agency's Staff Pension 
Committee and Mr. Nogueira Viana (Brazil) was elected as an alternate, with Mr. Hamada 
continuing to serve as a member and Mr. Campuzano Pifia continuing to serve as an alternate 
member of the Committee. 
The meeting rose at 5.25 p.m. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.97 October 1994 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL Distr. GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

THIRTY-EIGHTH (1994) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE NINTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Friday, 23 September 1994, at 10.20 a.m. 
President: Mr. BAER (Switzerland) 
CONTENTS 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
on the following items: 1 -58 
Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget 
and accounts documents 20-2 1 
The Agency's accounts for 1993 22 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1995 and 1996Scale of assessment of Members' contributions 
towards the Regular Budget 
23 
24 
Nuclear safely, radiological protection and radioactive 
waste management 25-29 
Practical utilization of food irradiation in 
developing countries 30-31 
Plan for producing potable water economically 32 
Strengthening of the Agency's main activities 33 

[*] GC(XXXVIII)/25. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/1 l/Rev.2. 
94-03898 (Vin) 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 2 

Item of the 
agenda* 


Paragraphs 

Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the 
efficiency of the safeguards system 34 

The financing of safeguards 
35 -36 

Personnel questions 
37 

Designation of members of the Board of Governors 38 -55 

Article VI of the Statute 
56 -57 

Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear material 58 

24 
Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the application 
of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-
Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 59-98 

25 
An African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 99 - 106 

26 
South Africa's position in the IAEA and the Board 
of Governors 107 - 128 

27 
Implementation of United Nations Security Council 
resolutions 687, 707 and 715 relating to Iraq 129 - 137 

Abbreviations used in this record 

DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
SADC Southern African Development Community 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 3 

ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

1. Mr. GOESELE (Germany), Chairman of the Committee of the Whole, 
presented the Committee's report on items 9-23 of the agenda. 
2. Under item 9, "Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget and accounts 
documents", the Committee recommended that the General Conference take note with 
appreciation of the information contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/5. 
3. Under item 10, "The Agency's accounts for 1993", the Committee recommended that 
the Conference adopt the draft resolution on page HI of document GC(XXXVIII)/4. 
4. Under item 11, "The Agency's programme and budget for 1995 and 1996", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C in 
Annex VI to document GC(XXXVIII)/5. 
5. Under item 12, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the Regular 
Budget", the Committee recommended the adoption by the Conference of the draft resolution 
on page 3 of document GC(XXXVlH)/9 and the scale of assessment in the Annex to that 
document. 
6. During the Committee's discussion, two delegations (those of Ukraine and Belarus) 
had expressed reservations concerning their countries' assessment rates, but they had not 
blocked consensus in the Committee. 
7. Under item 13, "Nuclear safety, radiological protection and radioactive waste 
management", the Committee recommended that the Conference take note of the information 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/4 and document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/6 and Corr.1. 
It further recommended that the Conference take note with appreciation of the information 
contained in document GC(XXXVIQ)/INF/9 and that it urge Member States to become 
parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety as early as possible, so that the Convention could 
enter into force without delay. Lastly, the Committee recommended that the Conference 
adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/27 and entitled "Measures 
to resolve international radioactive waste management issues". 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 4 

8. Under item 14, "Practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference take note of the report contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/6. 
9. Under item 15, "Plan for producing potable water economically", the Committee 
recommended the adoption by the Conference of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/26. 
10. Under item 16, "Strengthening of the Agency's main activities", the Committee 
recommended that the Conference adopt the following two draft resolutions: 
(a) 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIII)/35 on "Strengthening of the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities"; and 
(b) 
the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIII)/40 on "Extensive use of 
isotope hydrology for water resources management". 
11. Under item 17, "Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the 
safeguards system", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/42. 
12. With regard to item 18, "The financing of safeguards", the Committee recommended 
that the Conference take note with appreciation of the report contained in the Annex to 
document GC(XXXVIII)/20 and that it request the Board of Governors to re-establish the 
Informal Working Group on the Financing of Safeguards. 
13. Under item 19, "The financing of technical assistance", the Committee recommended 
to the Conference the adoption of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/36. 
14. Under item 20, "Personnel questions", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/38, relating to 
the staffing of the Agency's Secretariat, and the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/39, relating to women in the Secretariat. 
15. Under item 21, "Designation of Members of the Board of Governors", he regretted 
to inform the Conference that, after extensive and exhaustive discussion of the issue, the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 5 

Committee had not been able to recommend adoption of the draft resolution contained in 
Attachment 2 to document GC(XXXVIII)/16. 

16. With regard to item 22, "Article VI of the Statute", the Committee recommended that 
the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/43 and 
relating to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute. One delegation had agreed to join 
the consensus on the draft resolution on the understanding, shared by a few other delegations, 
that the "effective mechanism" referred to in the draft resolution would be open to all 
Member States and would have a negotiating mandate. 
17. Under item 23, "Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear material", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(XXXVIII)/44. 
18. In conclusion, he thanked the members of the Committee for the spirit of co-operation 
they had shown. 
19. The PRESIDENT, inviting the Conference to take one by one the items 
considered by the Committee of the Whole, said that consultations were in progress on the 
subject of technical assistance in the Middle East. He accordingly suggested that 
consideration of item 19, "The financing of technical assistance", be postponed until a later 
stage. 
Harmony and compatibility of programme and budget and accounts documents (agenda 
item 9) 

20. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of the information 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/5. 
21. It was so decided. 
The Agency's accounts for 1993 (agenda item 10) 

22. The draft resolution on page m of document GCfXXXVniV4 was adopted. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 6 

The Agency's programme and budget for 1995 and 1996 (agenda item 11) 

23. Draft resolutions A. B and C in Annex VI to document GC(XXXVmV5 were 
adopted. 
Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the Regular Budget (agenda item 12) 


24. The draft resolution on page 3 of document GC(XXXVIIIV9 and the scale of 
assessment in the Annex to that document were adopted. 
Nuclear safety, radiological protection and radioactive waste management (agenda item 13) 

25. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note of the information contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/INF/4 and document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/6 and Corr.l. 
26. It was so decided. 
27. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of the information 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/INF/9 and to urge Member States to become parties 
to the Convention on Nuclear Safety as early as possible, so that it could enter into force 
without delay. 
28. It was so decided. 
29. The draft resolution in document GCrXXXVmV27 was adopted. 
Practical utilization of food irradiation in developing countries (agenda item 14) 
30. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note of the report contained in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/6. 
31. It was so decided. 
Plan for producing potable water economically (agenda item 15) 
32. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIID/26 was adopted. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 7 

Strengthening of the Agency's main activities (agenda item 16) 

33. The draft resolutions in documents GCfXXXVmV35 and GCfXXXVIID/40 were 
adopted. 
Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the safeguards system (agenda 
item 17) 

34. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVnD/42 was adopted. 
The financing of safeguards (agenda item 18) 

35. The PRESIDENT took it that, as recommended by the Committee of the 
Whole, the General Conference wished to take note with appreciation of the report contained 
in the Annex to document GC(XXXVIII)/20 and to request the Board of Governors to reestablish 
the Informal Working Group on the Financing of Safeguards. 
36. It was so decided. 
Personnel questions (agenda item 20) 

37. The draft resolutions in documents GCrxXXVmV38 and GCrxxXVmV39 were 
adopted. 
Designation of members of the Board of Governors (agenda item 21) 

38. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said it was most unfortunate that the Committee 
of the Whole had been unable to reach a consensus. Under the circumstances, his delegation 
would like a vote to be taken by secret ballot on the draft resolution contained in 
Attachment 2 to document GC(XXXVIII)/16. 
39. The PRESIDENT pointed out that Rule 72 of the Conference's Rules of 
Procedure provided that, except in elections to the Board of Governors, the normal method 
of voting was by show of hands, a vote by roll-call being possible at the request of any 
Member State. Thus, a vote by secret ballot was not automatically provided for, but if the 
Conference wished to vote by secret ballot in the present case it could of course do so. 

GC(XXXVUI)/OR.9 
page 8 

40. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said that, as he understood it, the provision that 
"the normal method of voting shall be by show of hands" did not preclude voting by secret 
ballot in the present case. 
41. The PRESIDENT asked for views on whether that procedure should be 
adopted. 
42. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said that, as he saw it, the matter was not one 
for discussion. It was the right of any Member State to request a vote, and to specify the 
manner in which the vote should be taken. 
43. Mr. STRATFORD (United States of America) said that there was no provision 
in the Rules of Procedure regarding use of the secret ballot procedure in cases like the one 
under discussion. 
44. Consequently, pursuant to Rule 62(c) of the Rules of Procedure he moved the 
adjournment of the debate on the item under discussion, which could be taken up again the 
following year. 
45. The PRESIDENT drew the Conference's attention to Rule 59 of the Rules of 
Procedure, under which two delegates might speak in favour, and two against, a motion for 
the adjournment of a debate, after which the motion should be immediately put to the vote. 
46. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said his delegation opposed the motion. 
However, since the Rules of Procedure required that such a motion be put to the vote, he 
requested that the vote be taken by roll-call. 
47. Mr. RQUVILLOIS (France) and Mr. MENDEN (Germany) supported the 
United States motion. 
48. The PRESIDENT said the Conference would now proceed with a roll-call vote 
on the United States motion that the debate on the item under discussion be adjourned. 
49. The Czech Republic, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to 
vote first. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 9 

50. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, 
Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, 
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mauritius, Monaco, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, 
Russia Federation, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Syrian Arab Republic, The former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia, Turkey, United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Uzbekistan. 

Against: Cuba, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Thailand. 

Abstaining: Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Chile, China, Colombia, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Ethiopia, Guatemala, Holy See, Islamic Republic of Iran, 
Jordan, Republic of Korea, Lebanon, Mexico, Namibia, Nigeria, 
Pakistan, Paraguay, Peru, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, United Republic of Tanzania, Uruguay, 
Venezuela, Zambia, Zimbabwe. 

51. There were 44 votes in favour and 5 against, with 31 abstentions. The motion was 
adopted. 

52. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) commended those who had also voted against 
the motion for their courage and sense of fairness and thanked those who had abstained from 

voting, thereby indicating that they were in sympathy with the thinking behind the draft 

resolution submitted by the Philippines. The aim of the draft resolution had been to create 

greater transparency in the workings of the Board of Governors, something which many of 

those who had voted for the motion often claimed to favour. 

53. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that, although his delegation believed in the 
need for transparency in the Board's designation process, which could only be described as 

obsolete, it had abstained from voting because - with a view to discussions which would no 

doubt take place in the next Board of Governors - it wished to help maintain the momentum 

towards greater transparency in that process which had already been generated. 

54. Mr. RAMIREZ LANDAZURI (Ecuador) said that, although his delegation 
sympathized to a certain extent with the thinking behind the draft resolution, it had abstained 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 

page 10 

from voting because it believed that the issues at stake should be considered in depth within 
the framework of an examination of all the implications of revising Article VI of the Statute. 

55. Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria) said that his delegation had abstained from voting 
not for the reason suggested by the delegate of the Philippines, but because it believed that 
further consideration of the important issues raised by him was desirable. 
Article VI of the Statute (agenda item 22) 

56. The draft resolution in document GCrXXXVmV43 was adopted. 
57. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines) said that his delegation was the delegation 
mentioned by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole as having agreed to join the 
consensus on the draft resolution on the understanding that the "effective mechanism" 
referred to in the draft resolution would be open to all Member States and would have a 
negotiating mandate. 
Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear material (agenda item 23) 

58. The draft resolution in document GCrXXXVmV44 was adopted. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE AGENCY AND THE 
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA FOR THE APPLICATION OF 
SAFEGUARDS IN CONNECTION WITH THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION 
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (GC(XXXVIII)/19, GC(XXXVIII)/31 and 
Add.l and 2) 

59. The PRESIDENT said that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/624 adopted by the General Conference in 1993. The 
Conference had before it document GC(XXXVIII)/19, containing a report by the Director 
General on developments during the past year, and document GC(XXXVIII)/31, containing 
a draft resolution submitted by a large number of Member States. He invited the delegate 
of France to introduce the draft resolution. 
60. Mr. ROUVILLOIS (France) said that the draft resolution was based on the 
same spirit of objectivity as the resolution adopted by the General Conference - by a very 
large majority - in 1993 and reflected the developments of the past year. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 11 

61. The preamble referred to all the decisions taken by the Board of Governors and the 
United Nations Security Council and noted the recent report of the Director General. It 
reflected the continuing deep concern of the international community about the failure of the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea (DPRK) to implement essential elements of its 
safeguards agreement with the Agency, which was still in force, and expressed both regret 
at the DPRK's withdrawal from membership of the Agency and the hope that it would 
resume its place within the Agency. Lastly, it expressed support for all efforts - including 
the bilateral discussions now under way - to achieve full implementation of the safeguards 
agreement. 
62. The operative paragraphs were very similar to those of the 1993 resolution. They 
expressed unwavering support for the efforts being made by the Director General and the 
Secretariat with a view to the implementation not only of the inspection activities provided 
for in the agreement but also of those recently called for by the United Nations Security 
Council. Quite rightly, continuing concern was expressed over the non-compliance of the 
DPRK with its safeguards agreement. Lastly, the co-sponsors emphasized the importance 
of the DPRK's allowing the Agency to have access to all safeguards-relevant information and 
locations in the DPRK. 
63. In preparing the draft resolution, the co-sponsors had borne in mind not only the 
special responsibilities of the General Conference but also the complexity of the problem. 
They had endeavoured to respect the positions and sensibilities of all Member States and 
hoped that the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus. 
64. Mr. CHEN (China) said that the report by the Director General in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/19 clearly described the events which had taken place with regard to the 
DPRK nuclear issue over the past year. From the report it could be seen that there had been 
crises, but also encouraging developments. On the whole, and especially since the June 
session of the Board, the encouraging developments had predominated - and the situation was 
improving. In the message of the United Nations Secretary-General to the Conference there 
had been a reference to positive steps taken by the DPRK, and the Secretary-General was to 
be commended on his assessment of the situation. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 12 

65. Since August there had been progress in the ongoing bilateral negotiations, and the 
Agency had carried out inspection activities of broader scope. Although the DPRK nuclear 
issue was far from being resolved, it had entered a new - more positive - phase. There were 
accordingly grounds for optimism. 
66. Thanking the governments and individuals involved - including the Director General 
and his colleagues - for their constructive efforts, he expressed the hope that those efforts 
would be intensified and that a spirit of goodwill, co-operation and understanding would 
prevail. Negotiations should be conducted patiently, pragmatically and open-mindedly with 
a view to resolving the issue at an early date, in a fair manner and through the proper 
channels. The experience of the past two years had shown that a solution could not be found 
any other way. Pressure - resulting in conflict - was simply counter-productive. 
67. China's objective was the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone on the Korean 
Peninsula in the interests of peace and stability in the region and worldwide, and to that end 
he appealed for constructive efforts on the part of all concerned. 
68. The Chinese delegation could not see the point of the draft resolution now before the 
Conference. It totally ignored the positive developments of the past year and contained no 
positive or encouraging language. It was even more demanding in tone than the resolution 
adopted in 1993 and could only have a negative impact. He hoped, therefore, that the cosponsors 
would reconsider their position before it was too late. 
69. Mr. ARCILLA (Philippines), encouraging the Director General to continue 
his efforts directed towards full implementation of the safeguards agreement between the 
Agency and the DPRK, said that his Government was very concerned about the fact that full 
implementation of that agreement had not yet been achieved. The DPRK should comply with 
the obligations which it had entered into by acceding to the NPT and concluding an NPT 
safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
70. In that connection, his delegation, which welcomed the developments in the talks 
between the United States and the DPRK, had noted the stated position of the United States 
that future progress in its bilateral talks with the DPRK would depend on full compliance by 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 13 

the DPRK with its safeguards obligations. Only full compliance would ensure the integrity 
of the non-proliferation regime. 

71. Mr. LEE (Republic of Korea) said that the Director General's report reflected 
the tenacity and commitment with which the Secretariat had, over the past 12 months, 
endeavoured to implement the 1993 General Conference resolution on the implementation of 
the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the DPRK. It also reflected the cynicism 
and contempt with which the DPRK had defied repeated appeals by the General Conference, 
the Board of Governors and the Security Council for full compliance with its obligations 
under that agreement, which was still in force. The Director General and the Secretariat, 
including its safeguards inspectors, were to be commended for their patient and impartial 
efforts to discharge their responsibilities under exceptionally difficult circumstances. 
72. Twelve months after adoption of the 1993 General Conference resolution, the 
completeness and correctness of the DPRK's initial report had still not been verified, the 
amount of undeclared plutonium in the DPRK was still not known and it was still unclear 
whether diversion of plutonium to the military sector had taken place. Despite exhortations 
and warnings from all sides, the scope of Agency inspections in the DPRK was now more 
restricted than when they had begun - in 1992. 
73. The past year had been particularly frustrating for the Agency. The safeguards 
implementation situation in the DPRK had gone from bad to worse and, despite further Board 
resolutions, the Agency's endeavours to implement the safeguards agreement had been 
countered by widening non-compliance on the part of the DPRK. The presence of 
inspectors, now allowed - subject to various restrictions - at the DPRK's discretion, was 
barely enough to maintain the continuity of safeguards knowledge. 
74. The situation had deteriorated swiftly, in the spring of 1994, when the DPRK had 
discharged spent fuel from its five-megawatt Experimental Nuclear Power Reactor without 
proper safeguards measures as required by the Agency, in defiance of the Security Council's 
call to it to proceed with the discharge operation in such a way as to preserve the technical 
possibility of measuring the discharged fuel rods at a later date. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 14 

75. After the Board of Governors had, on 10 June 1994, adopted a resolution finding the 
DPRK in further non-compliance with its safeguards agreement and suspending non-medical 
Agency assistance to the DPRK in accordance with the Statute, the DPRK had reacted by 
withdrawing from the Agency. Never before had the Agency been faced with such 
challenges to its authority as the guardian of the non-proliferation regime. 
76. Within the Agency context, the present situation was therefore as bleak as ever, and 
the DPRK nuclear issue would not be resolved for a long time - if ever. 
77. In the bilateral negotiations between the United States and the DPRK, there had been 
developments associated with steps taken by the DPRK to permit an extension of the scope 
of inspections to additional locations. They offered a glimmer of hope of some forward 
movement, following a lengthy period of backtracking, and were to be welcomed, although 
there was no reason to be excited given the ground lost over the past two years. Only when 
the point reached more than two years previously had again been reached would it be 
possible to start talking about progress. 
78. The problems relating to the implementation of the safeguards agreement with the 
DPRK were threefold. First, the prolonged non-compliance by the DPRK with the 
agreement was a cause for serious concern, the time already taken to verify the completeness 
and correctness of the DPRK's initial declaration being unprecedented in the Agency's 
history. The inability of the international community to deal adequately with the DPRK's 
open and persistent violation of the agreement would most probably result in worldwide 
cynicism and complacency about the inviolability of safeguards obligations. It was not only 
the credibility and integrity of the Agency that were at stake, but the future of the NPT 
regime and the inter-Korean denuclearization agreement as well. 
79. Second, the DPRK's selective approach to inspections was also a cause for serious 
concern. The "a la carte" approach, with the DPRK allowed to fend off inspections at 
locations of real interest to the Agency in return for access to information and locations of 
lesser safeguards relevance, would undermine the credibility of the entire safeguards system. 
80. Third, it was necessary to guard against the DPRK's attempt to link the scope of the 
Agency's inspection activities with an extraneous element - namely, progress in political talks 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 15 

with a third party. The bilateral process could be meaningful only if it complemented the 
Agency's efforts to achieve the ultimate goal - nuclear transparency in the DPRK. 
Moreover, it did not exempt the DPRK from its obligations under the NPT and its safeguards 
agreement; those obligations were unconditional and non-negotiable. 

81. In view of the events of the past year, the General Conference must take a clear 
position and provide guidelines on how to proceed in the crucial matter of implementation 
of the safeguards agreement with the DPRK. That was why his delegation had joined so 
many others in sponsoring the draft resolution in document GC(XXXVIII)/31, which it hoped 
would be adopted without a vote. 
82. The CHAIRMAN announced that a roll-call vote on the draft resolution had 
been requested by the Chinese delegation. 
83. Mr. CHEN (China), speaking in an explanation of vote before the vote, said 
his delegation was not in favour of the draft resolution for three reasons. First, it was not 
balanced: it ignored the positive developments relating to the DPRK nuclear issue and did 
not reflect in a balanced way the information presented in the Director General's report. 
Secondly, it was not realistic: it ignored many aspects of the situation in the DPRK, made 
excessive demands and was much stronger than the corresponding resolution adopted the year 
before. Thirdly, it was not constructive: although there had been movement in the right 
direction, the draft resolution struck a discordant note. His delegation would therefore 
abstain in the vote. 
84. Turning to a different topic, he said that his Government often sent high-level officials 
to Agency meetings, but their statements were not always correctly interpreted. China had 
repeatedly raised the issue within the Agency, and in the United Nations, but there had been 
no improvement in the standard of interpretation from Chinese. It was true that interpreters 
were sometimes seconded from other duty stations and might be unfamiliar with the subjects 
discussed in an organization like the Agency, but a reasonable standard of interpretation was 
essential. He hoped the problem would be thoroughly examined by the Secretariat and that 
appropriate steps would be taken to resolve it. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 16 

85. The PRESIDENT said he understood that the Secretariat would look into the 
matter very seriously. 

86. He then invited the Conference to proceed to a roll-call vote on the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/31. 

87. Australia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
88. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour: Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, 
Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, 
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, 
Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Jordan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, 
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, 
Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, Netherlands, New Zealand, Nigeria, 
Norway, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Slovak Republic, 
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand, The 
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, 
United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United Republic of Tanzania, 
United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Zambia. 

Against: Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 

Abstaining: Bangladesh, China, Cuba, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon, 
Pakistan, Sri Lanka*, Syrian Arab Republic, Zimbabwe. 

89. The draft resolution was adopted by 76 votes to 1. with 10 abstentions. 
90. Mr. BAKSHI (India), speaking in explanation of vote, said his Government 
had a consistent position regarding implementation of the safeguards agreement between the 

Agency and the DPRK. The way to proceed in trying to resolve such a complex problem 

was patient discussion and negotiation rather than the imposition of deadlines and 

confrontation. Discussion was essential, not only between the DPRK and the Agency, but 

also among all of the other parties. His delegation had reservations about the referral of such 

an important matter to other bodies without any visible results. 

The delegation of Sri Lanka subsequently informed the Secretariat that it had intended 
to vote in favour of the draft resolution. 


GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 17 

91. India had consistently expressed its support for the Agency and the Director General 
in their efforts to pursue a dialogue and secure the co-operation of all parties and had also 
consistently urged the DPRK to co-operate, and progress had been achieved in the past. 
Recently, India had welcomed the 12 August 1994 agreement reached between the United 
States and the DPRK - an agreement following which the Agency's inspection activities had 
been broadened. In that connection it should be recalled that reference had been made in the 
message of the United Nations Secretary-General to the fact that some positive steps had 
recently been taken by the DPRK. 
92. His delegation had hoped that the message emanating from the General Conference 
would be one of conciliation. Regrettably, the resolution just adopted was not conciliatory and 
it seemed to lack balance. That was why his delegation had abstained. 
93. Mr. TARMIDZI (Indonesia) said his delegation had voted in favour of the 
draft resolution because it believed that a peaceful solution to the nuclear issue on the Korean 
Peninsula should continue to be pursued, together with full implementation of the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency and the DPRK. 
94. His delegation had been encouraged by the indication in the statement by the Director 
General that representatives of the DPRK were ready to enlarge the scope of the Agency's 
inspections in the DPRK following recent progress in bilateral talks with the United States. 
Earlier, his country had welcomed the joint press statement issued after the 
10-14 September 1994 expert-level talks between the DPRK and the United States, which had 
spoken of full and frank discussions on a number of complex technical matters and of 
agreement between the DPRK and the United States to discuss them further. 
95. Against that background, his delegation would have liked to see the positive aspects 
of the present situation better reflected in the draft resolution. At all events, it hoped that 
those positive aspects would lead to confidence-building measures in the area of nonproliferation 
safeguards. 
96. Mr. OWN (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that his delegation's vote against the 
draft resolution did not mean that his country was against Agency safeguards; indeed, it had 
concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency. It would have preferred, however, to 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 18 

see more emphasis on dialogue in the efforts to achieve full implementation of the safeguards 
agreement between the Agency and the DPRK. 

97. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon), expressing support for dialogue with the DPRK, 
said that the ongoing negotiations between the United States and the DPRK had resulted in 
increased DPRK co-operation with the Agency - something that was not sufficiently well 
reflected in the Director General's report. There should be no double standards in the 
application of safeguards; all countries, without exception, should co-operate with the Agency 
and its Director General. It was in the light of those views that his delegation had abstained 
in the vote. 
98. Mr. GARCIA DE LA CRUZ (Cuba) said his delegation's position, already 
stated both in the Board of Governors and in the General Conference, was that the problem 
under consideration should be resolved through dialogue; the adoption of resolutions was not 
a wise move, nor was it likely to achieve the desired results. At the same time, his 
delegation believed that countries which voluntarily entered into international agreements 
should comply with them. It was against that background that his delegation had abstained 
in the vote. 
AN AFRICAN NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONE (GC(XXXVIII)/13, GC(XXXVIII)/30) 

99. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/625 adopted by the General Conference at its previous 
session. As requested in operative paragraph 4 of that resolution, the Director General had 
submitted - in document GC(XXXVIII)/13 - a report on the progress made in implementing 
the resolution. That report had been considered by the Board of Governors the week before, 
and a draft resolution had since been submitted on behalf of the African Group in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/30. He invited the representative of South Africa to introduce the draft 
resolution. 
100. Mr. RQUX (South Africa) said it was an honour and a privilege to introduce 
the draft resolution on behalf of the African Group. 
101. Africa was the only continent to have rolled back an existing nuclear weapons 
programme, and the vision of an African nuclear-weapon-free zone - something being 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 19 

pursued since the early 1960s - was now close to reality. The Agency, the Organization of 
African Unity and the United Nations had provided invaluable assistance in the negotiations 
directed towards the creation of such a zone, and the draft text in question was now close to 
finalization. Accordingly, the African Group looked forward to the draft resolution's 
receiving unanimous support in the General Conference. 

102. Referring to the general debate statement of the South African Foreign Minister, he 
said that the countries of Africa were helping to bring about a new dawn where children not 
just in Africa but throughout the world - could look forward to a future without the threat 
of nuclear devastation. 
103. Mr. BAKSHI (India), having expressed support for the wish of the people of 
Africa to achieve comprehensive and lasting peace on that continent, said his delegation had 
a certain position of principle with regard to the concept of nuclear-weapon-free zones. It 
believed that any proposal for the establishment of such a zone should emanate from the 
region concerned, that it should evolve from consultations and negotiations among the States 
of the region concerned and that it should be based on the consent of all the States of the 
region concerned. 
104. The States of the African region were all working towards the establishment of an 
African nuclear-weapon-free zone and, at their request, the Director General had been 
assisting them in their efforts. His delegation was therefore able to support the draft 
resolution. 
105. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference wished to adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/30 without a vote. 
106. The draft resolution in document GCrXXXVnD/30 was adopted. 
SOUTH AFRICA'S POSITION IN THE IAEA AND THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS 
(GC(XXXVIII)/15, GC(XXXVIII)/29) 

107. The PRESIDENT recalled that the inclusion of the item had been requested 
by South Africa, which had submitted an explanatory memorandum in document 
GC(XXXVIII)/15. In addition, a draft resolution had been submitted - in document 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 20 

GC(XXXVIII)/29 - by South Africa on behalf of the African Group. He invited the delegate 
of Tunisia to introduce the draft resolution. 

108. Mr. AMMAR (Tunisia), speaking as a representative of the country currently 
exercising the presidency of the Organization of African Unity, said it was a special pleasure 
to introduce the draft resolution on behalf of the African Group. 
109. At the June 1994 summit of the Organization of African Unity in Tunisia, the 
participating Heads of State and Government had solemnly decided that democratic South 
Africa should be reinstated in the international community. The democratic transformation 
of South Africa had been a cause for rejoicing, and the statement by the South African 
Foreign Minister had been a historic and inspiring one. With the end of apartheid and South 
Africa's reinstatement in the international community, the African Group was submitting the 
draft resolution now before the Conference in order to normalize the situation within the 
Agency and to ensure that all political consequences of apartheid were eradicated. South 
Africa was now qualified to participate in all the activities and organs of the Agency and to 
resume its responsibilities in full. 
110. In welcoming South Africa's reinstatement, the African Group saluted Egypt for the 
way in which it had discharged its responsibility on behalf of the African continent during 
the transition from apartheid to democracy in South Africa and commended it for the 
constructive role it had played. 
111. The African Group welcomed the positive relations that had developed between 
democratic South Africa and other African States and looked forward to continued 
consultation within the Group. With the end of apartheid, a new spirit of co-operation in 
Africa was already promoting the best interests of the African continent. The developments 
in Africa provided a real opportunity for the Agency to accord to Africa its legitimate and 
appropriate level of representation in the Board of Governors and in all structures within the 
Agency. 
112. The moment was a historic one for Africa and the Agency, and the African Group 
looked forward to the draft resolution's receiving unanimous support. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 21 

113. Mr. ADEKANYE (Nigeria), associating himself with the statement made by 
the delegate of Tunisia, said that Nigeria had been in the forefront of the international 
campaign to abolish the apartheid system and during that time had supported the exclusion 
of the then Government of South Africa from all Agency activities. He was therefore now 
particularly pleased and proud to welcome South Africa back in the Agency and to invite it 
to participate fully in the Agency's activities. 
114. In their resolutions welcoming democratic South Africa into the international 
community, the General Assembly and the Security Council had requested the specialized 
agencies and related organizations to take all necessary measures to re-establish that country's 
full membership, and South Africa had been welcomed as a member of the Organization of 
African Unity at its summit in Tunisia in June 1994. Against that background he hoped that 
the draft resolution would be adopted by consensus. 
115. Mr. ONSY (Egypt), endorsing the statement made by the delegate of Tunisia 
on behalf of the African Group, said his delegation was very grateful to the other members 
of the African Group for their appreciation of Egypt's role as representative of Africa within 
the Agency. 
116. The historic developments in South Africa marked the culmination of the struggle, 
tirelessly supported by Egypt, against apartheid and its political implications. He was 
therefore pleased to welcome South Africa again as a member of the African Group. He 
looked forward to dialogue and co-operation with South Africa within the Group and trusted 
that the vital interests of Africa would benefit from the Group's effective participation in the 
Agency's activities. This would be facilitated by greater representation of Africa in the 
Board of Governors, in keeping with the rising number of African States in the Agency. 
117. Ms. SCIflMMING-CHASE (Namibia), speaking on behalf of the SADC 
countries, associated herself with the sentiments expressed by the delegate of Tunisia. She 
congratulated South Africa on having resumed its place within the Agency and said she was 
confident that it would fulfil its proper role in all Agency organs, particularly the Board of 
Governors, to which she hoped it would be designated without undue delay. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 22 

118. The SADC countries greatly appreciated the role played by Egypt over the previous 
17 years as Africa's designated representative on the Board and hoped that the experience 
gained by it would be useful, especially with regard to the issue of equitable representation 
on the Board. 
119. Mr. BAKSHI (India), expressing his joy and pride at the imminent re-entry 
of South Africa as a full participant in all of the Agency's activities, echoed the sentiments 
of the Indian Minister of State for External Affairs, who, speaking in the General Assembly 
when - on 23 June - it had welcomed South Africa back into the community of nations, had 
described the occasion as epitomizing the fruition of the long and arduous struggle of the 
people of South Africa to end the ignominious system of apartheid and to join the community 
of nations, which had consistently supported the objective of establishing a non-racial, 
democratic and united South Africa. 
120. Whereas in resolution GC(XX)/RES/336 the General Conference had, in 1976, 
requested the Board to review the status and designation of South Africa because of the 
unacceptability of the apartheid regime, the draft resolution now before the General 
Conference symbolized joy at the success of the people of South Africa in ending that 
regime. India, which had been at the forefront of the anti-apartheid struggle, shared a sense 
of pride and fulfilment with the people of South Africa. 
121. Although everyone welcomed the new South Africa and looked forward to its effective 
participation in the Agency's activities, the difficult question of African representation on the 
Board had to be addressed. However, the African Group had displayed exemplary wisdom 
and maturity in the consultations which had taken place so far, and he was sure that the 
eventual decision would be marked by similar wisdom and maturity. 
122. Mr. RAMIREZ LANDAZURI (Ecuador), expressing support for the draft 
resolution, commended South Africa on the way in which it had completed the process of 
democratization. He welcomed the fact that South Africa had abandoned the manufacture 
of nuclear weapons and was willing to share its nuclear expertise with others for peaceful 
purposes and congratulated it on resuming its place within the Agency. 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 23 

123. Mr. TARMIDZI (Indonesia) associated himself with the sentiments expressed 
by previous speakers in welcoming South Africa, a member of the Non-Aligned Movement, 
to resumed participation in all activities of the Agency. In addition, he expressed his 
appreciation to Egypt for the positive and constructive role it had played during the past 
17 years. 
124. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference wished to adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/29 without a vote. 
125. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVmV29 was adopted. 
126. Mr. RQUX (South Africa), expressing his country's gratitude for the 
unanimous adoption of the draft resolution, said that the end of apartheid had also signalled 
the end of South Africa's international isolation. 
127. It would now be possible for South Africa to resume its full role within the Agency. 
His country was committed to nuclear non-proliferation and to transparency in the nuclear 
field and would do all it could to further those causes, at the same time bearing in mind the 
specific needs and goals of the countries of Africa. 
128. It welcomed the positive relations which it had with its African brothers and looked 
forward to continued consultations with all countries in the African Group, including Egypt. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS 687, 707 AND 715 
RELATING TO IRAQ (GC(XXXVIII)/10, GC(XXXVIII)/37) 

129. The PRESIDENT noted that the item had been included in the agenda pursuant 
to resolution GC(XXXVII)/RES/626, adopted by the General Conference in 1993. Pursuant 
to operative paragraph 4 of that resolution the Director General had submitted - in document 
GC(XXXVHT)/10 - a report which had been considered by the Board during its meetings the 
previous week. A draft resolution was before the Conference in document GC(XXXVIQ)/37, 
and he invited the representative of the United Kingdom to introduce it. 
130. Mr. HULSE (United Kingdom) said that much had been achieved since the 
Conference's previous session in fulfilling those elements of the three Security Council 
resolutions for which the Agency had primary responsibility. The Agency had completed the 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 24 

destruction or removal of all known materials and facilities which might be used to 
manufacture nuclear weapons. In addition, it was in a position to begin implementing its 
plans for long-term monitoring and verification. It now had a permanent presence in Iraq, 
which would enable it to extend its investigations should any new information about Iraq's 
past or current activities come to light. Those developments were reflected in preambular 
paragraph (f) and operative paragraphs 1 and 2 of the draft resolution. 

131. However, there were essential elements of the three Security Council resolutions 
which still had to be implemented, and that was a matter of grave concern to the Security 
Council, which had just decided not to lift the present sanctions against Iraq. The situation 
was reflected in preambular paragraph (d) and operative paragraphs 3 and 5. 
132. His delegation believed that the text represented a reasonable balance between those 
different elements, and he therefore hoped that it would be adopted by consensus. 
133. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said that the draft resolution was too weak and in 
need of improvement as it failed to reflect the true situation with regard to the fulfilment by 
Iraq of its obligations towards the Agency. 
134. His delegation's original intention had been to support the draft resolution but not to 
co-sponsor it. However, it had ultimately been prevailed upon to co-sponsor it by some of 
the other co-sponsors, who had felt that Kuwait - as the main party concerned - should 
clearly demonstrate its support. He therefore wished to make it clear that, although Kuwait 
supported the draft resolution, the inclusion of its name in the list of co-sponsors did not 
imply full satisfaction with all of the draft resolution's contents. 
135. The PRESIDENT took it that the Conference wished to adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(XXXVIII)/37 without a vote. 
136. The draft resolution in document GC(XXXVmV37 was adopted. 
137. Mr. YTURRIAGA (Spain) said his delegation had joined the consensus on the 
draft resolution despite the fact that it contained no reference to the 14 September statement 

GC(XXXVIII)/OR.9 
page 25 

by the President of the Security Council on the implementation of the Security Council 
resolutions in question. Because of that omission, his country had not been able to 
co-sponsor the draft resolution, although it was in full agreement with the operative part. 

The meeting rose at 1 p.m. 


