GC(40)/OR.10 
October 1996 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 


FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE TENTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Friday, 20 September 1996, at 4.35 p.m. 
President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 


Item 
agenda* 
of the 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
20 Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the application of 
safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons (resumed) 1 -6 
-Oral report by the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole on 
the following items: 7 -35 
-The Agency's accounts for 1995 21 
-The Agency's programme and budget for 1997 and 199822 
-Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards 
the Regular Budget 23 
-Measures to strengthen international co-operation in 
nuclear, radiation and w aste safety 24 -25 
-Strengthening of the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities 26 
-Plan for producing potable water economically 27 

[*] GC(40)/22. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96-03389 (XXII)

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 2 
CONTENTS 
(contd.) 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 
-Extensive use of isotope hydrology for water 
resources management 28 
-Strengthening the effectiveness and improving 
the efficiency of the safeguards system 29 
-Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear 
materials and other radioactive sources 30 
-Personnel questions 
(a) Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
(b) Women in the Secretariat 
} 
} 
} 
} 
} 
31 
-Article VI of the Statute 
(a) Amendment of Article VI 
} 
} 
} 
32 -35 
22 The implementation of United Nations Security Council 
resolutions relating to Iraq 36 -67 
19 Article VI of the Statute 
(b) Composition of regional groups 
} 
} 
} 
68 -72 
23 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 73 -74 
19 Article VI of the Statute 
(b) Composition of regional groups (resumed) 
} 
} 
} 
75 -90 
23 Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East 
(resumed) 91 -120 
129 
-Closing of the session 121 -


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 3 

Abbreviations used in this record 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
MESA Middle East and South Asia 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NWFZ Nuclear-weapon-free zone 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 4 

IMPLEMENTATIONOF THE AGREEMENT BETWEENTHE AGENCYANDTHE DEMOCRATIC 
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA FOR THE APPLICATION OF SAFEGUARDS IN CONNECTION 
WITH THE TREATYON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (GC(40)/16, 
GC(40)/16/Corr.1 and GC(40)/33 and Add.1) (resumed) 

1. 
The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to proceed to a roll-call 
vote on the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/33, as requested by the 

Chinese delegation. 

2. The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, having been drawn by lot by the 

President, was called upon to vote first. 

3. The result of the vote was as follows: 

In 

favour: 
Albania, Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belgium, 
Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, 
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, Estonia, 
Ethiopia, Finland, France, Germany, Ghana, Greece, 
Hungary, Iceland, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, 
Jordan, Kazakstan, Kenya, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, 
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Mexico, 
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Myanmar, Namibia, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Norway, 
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, 
Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, 
Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, 
Switzerland, Thailand, Tunisia, Turkey, Ukraine, United 
Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of America, 
Uruguay, Yemen, Zimbabwe. 

Abstaining: 
China, Cuba, India, Islamic Republic of Iran, Lebanon, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Pakistan, Syrian Arab Republic. 

4. The 
draft resolution adopted by 79 zero, with 8 abstentions.1
was 

votes 

to 

5. 
Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon) said in explanation of the vote that, although 
Lebanon fully supported the subjection of the DPRK's nuclear facilities to Agency 

safeguards, it had abstained in the roll-call vote because it felt that double standards 

were being applied in the treatment of countries. Israel, for example, did not have any 

1 
The delegation of Algeria subsequently informed the Secretariat that it would 
have abstained if it had been present at the time of the vote. 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 5 

of its nuclear installations under safeguards. As long as such discriminatory policies 
were pursued, there could be no justice in the international community. 

6. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia), explaining his country's vote, said that, although 
Malaysia had voted in favour of the draft resolution, it regretted the inclusion of 
preambular paragraph (f) thereof which, it felt, was hardly calculated to improve the 
negotiating climate between the Agency and the DPRK. 
ORAL REPORT BY THE CHAIRMAN OF THE COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 

7. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), Chairman of the Committee of 
the Whole, presenting the Committee's report on agenda items 9-19, said that the 
Committee had had very fruitful and constructive discussions and that all the 
recommendations being made had been adopted by consensus. 
8. Under item 9, "The Agency's accounts for 1995", the Committee recommended 
that the Conference adopt the draft resolution in document GC(40)/26. 
9. Under item 10, "The Agency's programme and budget for 1997 and 1998", the 
Committee recommended that the Conference adopt draft resolutions A, B and C in 
Annex I to document GC(40)/10. 
10. Under item 11, "Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the 
Regular Budget", the Committee recommended the adoption by the Conference of the 
draft resolution on page 3 of document GC(40)/12 and the scale of assessment 
contained in the Annex to that document. 
11. Under item 12, "Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear, 
radiation and waste safety", the Committee recommended that the Conference take 
note of the information contained in documents GC(40)/INF/4, GC(40)/INF/5, 
GC(40)/INF/9 and GC(40)/INF/9/Add.1 and adopt the draft resolutions on the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management, and establishing predisposal waste demonstration centres contained in 
documents GC(40)/27, GC(40)/28 and GC(40)/36 respectively. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 6 

12. Underitem13, "StrengtheningoftheAgency'stechnicalco-operationactivities", 
the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in document GC(40)/29. 
13. Under item 14, "Plan for producing potable water economically", the Committee 
recommended the adoption by the Conference of the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(40)/37. 
14. Under item 15, "Extensive use of isotope hydrology for water resources 
management", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(40)/30. 
15. Under item 16, "Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency 
of the safeguards system", the Committee recommended for adoption by the 
Conference the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/31. 
16. Under item 17, "Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other 
radioactive sources", the Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(40)/32. 
17. Under item 18, "Personnel questions", the Committee recommended that the 
Conference adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/38/Rev.1 relating 
to "Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat" and the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(40)/39 relating to "Women in the Secretariat". 
18. With regard to item 19, "Article VI of the Statute", the Committee, under item 
19(a) "Amendment of Article VI", recommended that the Conference adopt the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(40)/42. Under item 19(b), "Composition of 
regional groups", the Committee had not been able to agree on either of the two draft 
resolutions before it and therefore decided not to make any recommendation to the 
General Conference on that item. 
19. On behalf of the Vice-Chairmen of the Committee of the Whole and himself, he 
thanked the Conference for the confidence it had placed in them and also thanked all 
those who had taken part in the deliberations of the Committee for their co-operation. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 7 

20. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to take one by one the items 
which the Committee of the Whole had considered. 
The Agency's accounts for 1995 (agenda item 9) 

21. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/26 

was 

adopted. 
The Agency's programme and budget for 1997 and 1998 (agenda item 10) 

22. Draft 
resolutions 

A, Band 

C in 

Annex I to 

document 

GC(40)/10 

were 

adopted. 

Scale of assessment of Members' contributions towards the Regular Budget 
(agenda item 11) 

23. The draft resolution on page 3 of document GC(40)/12 and the scale of 
assessment 
contained 

in 

the 

Annex to 

that 

document 

were 

adopted. 

Measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear, radiation and waste 
safety (agenda item 12) 

24. The PRESIDENT assumed that the Conference wished to take note of the 
information contained in documents GC(40)/INF/4, GC(40)/INF/5, GC(40)/INF/9 and 
GC(40)/INF/9/Add.1 and adopt the draft resolutions contained in documents GC(40)/27, 
GC(40)/28 and GC(40)/36. 
25. It 
was 

so 

decided. 
Strengthening of the Agency's technical co-operation activities (agenda item 13) 

26. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/29 

was 

adopted. 
Plan for producing potable water economically (agenda item 14) 

27. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/37 

was 

adopted. 
Extensive use of isotope hydrology for water resources management (agenda item 
15) 

28. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/30 

was 

adopted. 

Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the safeguards 
system (agenda item 16) 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 8 

29. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/31 

was 

adopted. 

Measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive 
sources (agenda item 17) 

30. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/32 

was 

adopted. 
Personnel questions (agenda item 18) 

(a) Staffing of the Agency's Secretariat 
(b) Women in the Secretariat 
31. The draft resolutions in documents GC(40)/38/Rev.1 and GC(40)/39 were 
adopted. 
Article VI of the Statute (agenda item 19) 

(a) Amendment of Article VI 
32. The 
draft 

resolution 

in 

document 

GC(40)/42 

was 

adopted. 

33. The PRESIDENT said it was his understanding that consultations on 
item 19(b), "Composition of regional groups", were still continuing and proposed that 
consideration of that item be taken up at a later stage. 
34. It 
was 

so 

agreed. 

35. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) commended Mr. Ayatollahi on his chairing of 
the Committee of the Whole, whose deliberations he had conducted with great skill, 
diplomacy and patience, enabling it to conclude its work successfully. It was thanks 
to his guidance, allied to the collective spirit prevailing, that the Committee had been 
able to reach the sought for consensus on the draft resolution in document GC(40)/42 
concerning amendment of Article VI. 
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS 
RELATING TO IRAQ (GC(40)/13, GC(40)/34 and GC(40)/41) 

36. The PRESIDENT, noting that the item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(39)/RES/5 adopted by the General Conference in 1995, said 
that, pursuant to operative paragraph 8 of that resolution, the Director General had 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 9 

submitted the report contained in document GC(40)/13 covering the Agency's 
inspection activities in Iraq over the period September 1995-August 1996. The matter 
had been considered by the Board of Governors in March on the basis of an earlier 
report by the Director General. The General Conference also had before it in document 
GC(40)/34 a draft resolution on the subject along with an amendment to that draft 
resolution tabled that day by Iraq which was contained in document GC(40)/41. 
Despite its late distribution, he would permit consideration ofthe proposed amendment 
in accordance with Rule 63 of the Rules of Procedure. 

37. Ms. DORAN (Ireland), presenting the draft resolution in document 
GC(40)/34 on behalf of the European Union and the other co-sponsors, said that it 
reiterated many of the points made in previous resolutions on the subject and also took 
account of both positive and negative developments over the previous 12 months. 
While welcoming the establishment of an export/import monitoring mechanism and 
recognizing that Iraq had adopted a more constructive approach towards the Agency's 
Action Team, the resolution also noted with concern that Iraq had recently imposed 
restrictions on the Action Team's rights of access and demanded that those restrictions 
be lifted in accordance with Security Council resolution 707. 
38. The draft resolution was a thoroughly balanced one and she hoped that the 
Conference would see its way to adopt it without a vote. 
39. Mr. AL-HIJAJ (Iraq) said that the draft resolution did not take note of the 
positive developments in the situation, or instances of co-operation between the Iraqi 
authorities and the Action Team. 
40. Preambular paragraph (e) of the draft resolution said that Iraq had concealed 
information. However, Iraq had supplied vast quantities of information to the Agency. 
No mention was made of that fact. Also, with regard to the phrasing of paragraph (e), 
the words "noting with concern" were negative in tone. Iraq was therefore proposing 
that preambular paragraph (e) be deleted. 
41. Operative paragraph 4 implied that Iraq had not co-operated with the Action 
Team, whereas paragraph 27 of the Director General's report, contained in the 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 10 

Attachment to document GC(40)/13, stated that the Iraqi counterpart had continued to 
co-operate with the IAEA in a productive way. He therefore proposed that the 
beginning of the paragraph be amended to read: "Encourages Iraq to continue to cooperate 
constructively with the Action Team...". 

42. The wording of operative paragraph 5 also failed to take into account recent 
events. The Iraqi authorities had reviewed the last version of the Full, Final and 
Complete Declaration with the Action Team and had submitted a revised version on 
9 September 1996. In his oral address, the Director General had noted the receipt of 
that declaration. How could the General Conference call on Iraq to resolve remaining 
ambiguities, inconsistencies and contradictions before that declaration had been 
checked for accuracy? He therefore proposed that operative paragraph 5 be deleted. 
43. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that it was desirable for the draft 
resolution to be adopted by consensus. After hearing the points which had been 
raised by the representative of Iraq, the General Conference would need to ensure 
that its action reflected the reality of the situation. There were indeed several positive 
elements in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the Director General's report. The concerns 
expressed by Iraq were quite reasonable and should be taken into account. 
44. Ms. DORAN (Ireland)saidthattheamendmentswhichhadbeenproposed 
by the representative of Iraq were not acceptable to the sponsors of the draft 
resolution and, if Iraq insisted upon those amendments, she would have to insist that 
the draft resolution be put to a vote. 
45. Mr. HALIM (Sudan) noted that Iraq had not requested that the draft 
resolution not be adopted, but only that it should reflect the real situation and the 
contents of the Director General's report. There were clear indications of constructive 
co-operation between Iraq and the Action Team. Therefore, the draft resolution did 
not give a true reflection of the relationship between Iraq and the Agency. Moreover, 
Iraq had submitted a new version of its declaration which had still to be studied. 
46. The representative of Ireland had stated that the sponsors could not agree with 
the amendments which were being proposed by Iraq and were ready to insist on a 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 11 

vote. However, unlike the representative of Iraq, she had not explained why she was 
taking such a position and it would be useful if she could provide some clarification. 

47. Mr. SNYDER (United States of America) agreed with the representative of 
Sudan that it was important that the draft resolution reflect the reality of the situation. 
48. With regard to the Iraqi proposal that preambular paragraph (e) be removed, he 
noted that the General Conference, in the resolution it had passed the preceding year, 
had condemned Iraq for withholding information since 1991. That was a major cause 
of concern, it was still valid and it should be expressed. Since the preceding General 
Conference and the revelations surrounding the defection of General Hussein Kamel, 
Iraq had continued to withhold information. Indeed information had emerged only as 
a result of inquiries by the Action Team following analysis of one of Iraq's several socalled 
Full, Final and Complete Declarations. 
49. As to the proposed amendment to operative paragraph 4, while preambular 
paragraph (f) made it clear that Iraq had adopted a more constructive approach in 
recent times, it was still not co-operating fully and it was therefore important for the 
Conference to urge it to do so. 
50. With regard to the proposed deletion of operative paragraph 5, Iraq had 
submitted a series of Full, Final and Complete Declarations since 1992, none of which 
had actually been full, final or complete. The Action Team had identified ambiguities 
in the last report which had been submitted. Another draft had been submitted 
recently, but it was still important that the General Conference urge Iraq to resolve 
remaining ambiguities, inconsistencies and contradictions in the light of that history. 
51. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) maintained that the draft resolution, of which 
Kuwait was a co-sponsor, did take account of recent progress that had been made. 
The tone and language of the draft resolution were much less vigorous than the 
resolution passed in 1995 when the General Conference had "condemned" Iraq, and 
preambular paragraph (f) noted the more constructive approach which Iraq had 
adopted over the past 12 months. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 12 

52. With regard to the proposal by Iraq that preambular paragraph (e) should be 
deleted, his delegation had felt from the outset that the language of the draft 
resolution was in fact too weak but in a spirit of co-operation had agreed to the 
present wording. There were still many indications that Iraq was withholding 
information and the paragraph should stay. 
53. With regard to operative paragraph 4, the fact that the General Conference was 
urging Iraq to co-operate fully with the Action Team did not imply that the Action 
Team was not receiving any co-operation. Reference had been made to paragraphs 
27 and 28 of the Director General's report in the Attachment to document GC(40)/13 
and the positive comments contained therein. However, the latter half of paragraph 
27 contained much less reassuring comment which also needed to be taken into 
account, nor was the last sentence of paragraph 28 entirely positive. 
54. His delegation could not agree to the proposed deletion of operative paragraph 
5. There had certainly been inconsistencies in the previous versions of Iraq's 
declaration, so that paragraph of the resolution was essential. 
55. In conclusion, he associated himself with the statement by the delegate of 
Ireland, stressing that any changes in the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(40)/34 would make it meaningless. 
56. Mr. AL-HIJAJ (Iraq) said that the documentation in hand was vast and, 
in submitting the Full, Final and Complete Declaration, the Iraqi authorities had tried 
to include only the most important elements to make it more readable. The Action 
Team had been aware of that. 
57. His delegation would also insist on a vote on the draft resolution if there were 
no consensus. 
58. The PRESIDENT, observing that there seemed to be no prospect of 
consensus, said that the Conference would have to take a vote on the draft resolution 
and on the proposed amendments thereto. It would first of all have to vote on each 
of the three amendments proposed by Iraq, contained in document GC(40)/41, before 
it could vote on the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/34. He accordingly 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 13 

asked those present to vote by show of hands on Iraq's first proposed amendment, 
namely that preambular paragraph (e) be deleted. 

59. There 
were 

3 

votes 

in 

favour 

and 

58 

votes 

against, with 

15 

abstentions. The 
proposal was 

rejected. 

60. The PRESIDENT then asked those present to vote on the second proposed 
amendment concerning the wording of operative paragraph 4. 
61. There were 5 votes in favour and 60 against, with 13 abstentions. The 
proposal was 
rejected. 

62. Lastly, thePRESIDENT invitedthosepresenttovoteonthethirdproposed 
amendment, namely that operative paragraph 5 be deleted. 
63. There was 1 vote in favour and 61 against, with 15 abstentions. The proposal 
was 
rejected. 

64. The PRESIDENT then asked whether the Conference was prepared to 
adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/34 without a vote. 
65. Mr. PAVLINOV (Russian Federation) said that a vote should be taken 
because of the difference of views. 
66. A procedural discussion involving Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco), 
Mr. MAYRHOFER-GRÜNBÜHEL(Austria), Mr. UMAR (Nigeria)andMr. PAVLINOV (Russian 
Federation) took place regarding a proposal by Mr. Al-Ghais (Kuwait) that no action be 
taken on the proposal by the Russian Federation that a vote be taken on the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(40)/34. There was discussion about the Rule on 
which Mr. Al-Ghais' proposal was based as well as on whether voting could be 
interrupted once it had already commenced. The General Conference agreed to 
proceed to a vote on the issue, as requested by the Russian Federation. The 
PRESIDENT suggested that a vote be taken by a show of hands. 
67. There 
were 

69 

votes 

in 

favour 

of the 

draft 

resolution 

and 

none 

against, with 
11 abstentions. The 

resolution 

was 

adopted. 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 14 

ARTICLE VI OF THE STATUTE 

(b) 
COMPOSITION OF REGIONAL GROUPS (GC(40)/11 and Add.1, GC(40)/INF/7, 
GC(40)/COM.5/13 and 18/Rev.1) 
68. The PRESIDENT said he understood that informal consultations had been 
under way for some time and asked for news as to what stage they had reached. 
69. 
Mr. SNYDER (United States of America) said that they were continuing. 
The 
meeting 

was 

suspended 

at 

6.30 

p.m. and 
resumed 

at 

8.20 

p.m. 
70. Mr. SNYDER (United States of America), replying to the PRESIDENT, said 
that the informal consultations were still continuing. 
The 

meeting 

was 

suspended 

at 

8.25 

p.m. and 
resumed 

at 

8.45 
p.m. 
71. Mr. SNYDER (United States of America), supported by Mr. EL FADHEL 
KHALIL (Tunisia), Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco), Mr. WALKER (Australia), Mr. HALIM 
(Sudan) and Mr. UMAR (Nigeria), asked for a little more time to pursue informal 
consultations with a view to reaching a consensus and avoiding the need for a vote. 
72. The PRESIDENT, agreeing to defer that item further, invited the 
Conference to proceed to consideration of item 23. 
APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(40)/6 and Add.1, 
GC(40)/23 and Add.1) 

73. Mr. KAREM (Egypt) said that the same situation prevailed with that item 
as with the previous one, in that consultations were going on with a view to achieving 
a consensus on the draft resolution submitted. He therefore wished to request a little 
more time. 
74. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco)saidthatthetwoitemsinquestionconcerned 
the same region and the same countries and it was hoped to achieve a package deal 
covering both issues. The one could not be resolved independently of the other and 
he too therefore wished to request a further suspension. 
The 

meeting 

was 

suspended 

at 

8.55 
p.m. and 
resumed 

at 

11.15 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 15 

ARTICLE VI OF THE STATUTE 

(b) 
COMPOSITION OF REGIONAL GROUPS (GC(40)/11 and Add.1, GC(40)/INF/7, 
GC(40)/COM.5/13 and 18/Rev.1) (resumed) 
75. The PRESIDENT, recalling that no recommendation had been made by the 
Committee of the Whole on the composition of regional groups, said that, following the 

extensive consultations that had been held, he understood that there was agreement 

that he should read out the following statement: 

“The General Conference takes note of the Report by the Director General on 
Composition of Regional Groups under the agenda item ‘Amendment of Article 
VI of the Statute’ as contained in the Attachment to document GC(40)/11. It 
reiterates the principle of the sovereign equality of all Member States of the 
Agency, as provided for in Article IV.C of the Statute. It affirms that this 
principle requires that each Member State of the Agency be within one of the 
areas listed in Article VI.A.1 of the Statute. Recalling the draft resolution 
contained in document GC(39)/COM.5/10 dated 19 September 1995 and 
resolution GC(39)/RES/22 dated 22 September 1995, the Conference requests 
that the Chairman of the Board of Governors consult with Member States not yet 
listed in a regional area as well as with other Member States, including 
representatives of the regional areas, and that he report for consideration of the 
forty-first General Conference specific proposals to include each Member State 
within the appropriate area at the time of the Conference in September 1997.” 

76. 
He took it that the General Conference endorsed that statement. 
77. 
The 
President's 

statement 

was 

accepted. 

78. Mr. OTHMAN (SyrianArabRepublic)saidthat, althoughheagreedbyand 
large with the contents of the statement that the President had just read, he wished 

to stress that the inclusion of any country in a regional group had to be accepted by 

the other countries in that group. While any country had the right to belong to any 

regional group, geographical proximity was not the only criterion governing 

membership of such a group, since harmonious relations among the group's members 

were essential for fruitful co-operation. Such issues should be settled by consultations 

and he did not consider it possible to set a deadline, such as September 1997, for the 

completion of the process in view of all the factors involved. Finally, he expressed 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 16 

surprise at the inclusion in the President's statement of a reference to a draft resolution 
that had not been adopted the previous year. 

79. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (IslamicRepublicofIran)consideredthatthePresident's 
statement and the draft resolution submitted by Israel in document GC(40)/COM.5/13 
were essentially the same thing, differing only in format and the fact that the 
statement did not refer explicitly to Israel. He regretted that, despite the lengthy 
consultations, no effective result had been achieved and that the negotiations had not 
involved proper consultations with all parties concerned. 
80. Furthermore, there appeared to be a number of inaccuracies in the President's 
statement. Like the previous speaker, he felt it was inappropriate to refer to the 1995 
draft resolution. It was one-sided and had no official status. Furthermore, the 
references to document GC(40)/11, Article IV.C and Article VI.A.1 were not explicit. 
81. Operative paragraph 1 of resolution GC(39)/RES/22 highlighted the views that 
the primary responsibility for deciding upon the composition of regional groups lay 
with the respective groups themselves and that every State had the right to participate 
in a regional group. Both those views were important, yet the President's statement 
referred to only one of them. 
82. Finally, the President's statement indicated that specific proposals for the 
inclusion of each Member State within the appropriate regional area were to be made 
by the forty-first session of the General Conference, more or less reflecting the third 
operative paragraph of the current Israeli draft resolution. If that draft resolution had 
been debated, other delegations would have had the chance to present appropriate 
amendments. As it was, those delegations had been deprived of the chance to amend 
what had essentially become the resolution on the subject. 
83. Ms. HASAN (Pakistan) said that, although her delegation had gone along 
with the President's statement for the sake of consensus, it considered it inaccurate to 
affirm that the right of a Member State to belong to a certain area group was embodied 
in the Statute. As had been rightly asserted by the previous year's General 
Conference, the primary responsibility for deciding upon the composition of regional 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 17 

groups lay with the respective groups. Cultural and demographic aspects had to be 
taken into account, as had been done in the past, and of course the participation of a 
Member State in a particular group was only likely to be fruitful if it took place in an 
amicable environment. 

84. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that his delegation, whilst not objecting 
to the President's statement, also wished to stress that, as the 1995 Israeli draft 
resolution had not been adopted and had no legal status, it could not properly figure 
in a Conference decision. 
85. From the tone of the discussions it might appear that one country was the victim 
of a regional or international conspiracy. That was not the case. Other countries such 
as Kazakstan, Uzbekistan, Estonia and Lithuania were facing the same problem as 
Israel and, if a solution were to be found for Israel, it would have to be a general 
solution. 
86. Moreover, Israel was not the only country that had not been represented on the 
Board. Since the Agency's establishment, 36 countries had never been represented 
on the Board and of the countries that were Member States in 1957 -the year of 
Israel's joining the Agency -9 had never been Board members. 
87. When a country sought to belong to a geographical region, it did so for three 
main reasons: to benefit from regional co-operation projects, to have a political forum, 
and to become a member of the Board of Governors -a right accorded to all Member 
States pursuant to Article IV.C of the Statute. However, that Article did not necessarily 
mean that a country should be imposed upon a particular regional group, since such 
groups remained masters of their our destiny. 
88. In the case of the Africa Group, to which his country belonged, South Africa had 
not been permitted to join the Group as long as it maintained its apartheid policy, even 
though it belonged geographically to Africa. Once South Africa had abandoned 
apartheid, it had been allowed to join the Africa Group as well as all international and 
regional groups, and indeed, it was currently chairing the Africa Group at the Agency. 
That was a fine example for Israel to follow in its relations with its neighbours. Once 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 18 

the peace process had culminated in tangible results, Israel would be warmly 
welcomed into the MESA Group. 

89. Mr. HALIM (Sudan), associating himself with previous speakers, said he 
could go along with the President's statement but felt that the reference to the 1995 
draft resolution -designed by and for one Member State -was inappropriate. While 
resolution GC(39)/RES/22 stressed the view that the primary responsibility for deciding 
upon the composition ofregionalgroups lay with the respective groups themselves and 
that every State had the right to participate in a regional group, it needed to be 
remembered that natural geographical boundaries were not the only criteria governing 
membership of regional groups, and other considerations such as cultural and political 
harmony also had to be taken into account. Failing that, a country's membership of 
such a group would be purely formal. 
90. Finally, he endorsed the point made by the delegate of Morocco that any 
solution reached had to cater for all Member States that were not yet part of a regional 
group and should not simply be tailored for a single State. 
APPLICATION OF IAEA SAFEGUARDS IN THE MIDDLE EAST (GC(40)/6 and Add.1, 
GC(40)/23 and Add.1) (resumed)) 

91. The PRESIDENT said he understood that, in the light of extensive 
consultations, the sponsors of the draft resolution contained in document 
GC(40)/RES/23 had decided to replace it with the text of GC(39)/RES/24, suitably 
updated, which was thus now the only proposal before the General Conference. He 
took it that the Conference was now ready to adopt that resolution even though it had 
not been distributed to delegations on the previous day as envisaged in Rule 63. 
92. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

93. The PRESIDENT said that he also understood that, in the light of the 
consultations, the Conference was ready to accept the following statement: 
“The General Conference requests the Director General to invite experts from the 
Middle East and other areas to a technical workshop on safeguards, verification 
technologies, and related experience. It calls on the Director General to 
commence with preparations, in consultation with the parties concerned, with 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 19 

a view to developing an agenda and modalities that would help ensure a 
successful workshop.” 

94. The statement was adopted. 

95. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) said that, while his delegation had 
approved the text of the resolution in order to save the consensus, it regretted that the 
Conference had not felt able to be fully explicit. The only country in the Middle East 
possessing nuclear weapons and menacing its neighbours was Israel. Only the 
previous day it had bombed civilians in South Lebanon. Despite that, the resolution 
failed to affirm the need for Israel to sign the NPT and accept safeguards. The peace 
process was stalemated because of Israel's obstinacy in not adhering to the principle 
enunciated at the Madrid Middle East Peace Conference in October 1991. The present 
text did not even mention Israel. His delegation therefore hoped that the matter would 
be treated more equitably at the forty-first General Conference and a more realistic 
resolution adopted on a NWFZ in the Middle East. 
96. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon), referring to operative paragraph 4 of the 
resolution, said Lebanon believed multilateral negotiations should follow and not 
precede bilateral negotiations. Indeed, how could the former proceed with Israel 
baulking at the latter? Israel not only failed to recognize the principle of land for 
peace, adopted at the Madrid Conference, but had also backed down from 
commitments previously entered into with the Palestinians. 
97. The previous day Israel had bombed civilians in Lebanon, obliging it to call a 
meeting of the Committee for the Protection of Civilians. It was also reported that 
Israel was sending reinforcements to the front line of the border area occupied by 
Israel in Lebanon, so the future looked grim. 
98. With its nuclear weapons, Israel posed a threat to the peace of the entire region, 
which was why the Conference in its resolution should have urged Israel by name to 
sign the NPT and submit its facilities to Agency safeguards. 
99. Mr. ASHOK (India) said that, while India had gone along with the 
consensus on the issue, it wished to make two points of principle. Firstly, the 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 20 

resolution contained a reference to the NPT. India maintained that accession to any 
treaty should be voluntary, since it was a sovereign act and could not be forced on any 
State. 

100. Secondly, as regards the establishment of a NWFZ, such a zone could only be 
established in any region with the voluntary agreement of all the States concerned. 
101. Ms. DORAN(Ireland), speaking for the European Union, said that, although 
it had joined the consensus on the resolution, the European Union regretted that the 
Conference had not found it possible to take due account of the previous year's 
decision to extend the NPT indefinitely. 
102. The European Union wished to reiterate its appeal to all States in all regions to 
accede to the NPT for the benefit of all mankind. 
103. Mr. KAREM (Egypt) said his delegation considered it would have been 
more appropriate to have adopted the agreed statement before adopting the previous 
year's resolution. 
104. Egypt endorsed the statement by the European Union. It was a matter for regret 
that it had not been possible to reflect the terms of the resolution on the Middle East, 
adopted at the NPT Review and Extension Conference the previous year, in a Middle 
East resolution at the Agency's General Conference. Indeed, what was really needed 
was an update of the New York resolution reflecting present realities. 
105. Egypt had been behind the proposal for a safeguards workshop, which was 
mentioned in the consensus statement. It considered that such an exercise would 
provide all parties concerned with an opportunity for direct contact and direct 
negotiations. The idea was not, of course, a new one -the Agency had already held 
a workshop in Vienna in 1993, which had been a most successful event, and that had 
been followed by a "conceptual basket" workshop2 in Cairo in 1994, attended by 
Agency experts. It was to be noted that Israeli experts had participated unofficially in 
the Vienna workshop. 
See GC(XXXVIII)/18, paragraph 11. 


GC(40)/OR.10 
page 21 

106. A safeguards culture was beginning to be developed in the Middle East. That 
could not flourish without transparency, without a broad exchange of views and 
without acculturation to the safeguards regime, for which another workshop would 
provide the ideal forum and stimulus. 
107. Finally, he expressed the hope that the Agency would take concrete steps as 
soon as possible to organize such a workshop, and that all Member States would cooperate 
with the Director General in that exercise which should help pave the way for 
a NWFZ in the Middle East. He trusted that the decision just adopted would be 
included in the Agency's index of resolutions and decisions. 
108. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) expressed a reservation 
concerning operative paragraph 4 of the resolution, referring to the ongoing Middle 
East peace negotiations, which in his view was not only irrelevant to the subject of the 
resolution but also outside the Agency's terms of reference. He wished to reaffirm his 
country's position that the peace process, as events had shown, was not conducive to 
restoring the inalienable rights of the Palestinian people. The inclusion of that 
paragraph in the resolution was especially regrettable, considering that the explicit 
reference to Israel in the second operative paragraph had been deleted. He hardly 
needed to remind the Conference that Israel was the sole country in the region which 
had nuclear capability, whilst at the same time refusing to accede to the NPT and to 
place its facilities under safeguards. On the contrary, it had pursued a nuclear 
weapons programme that was a major source of concern, endangering the peace and 
security of the Middle East and the whole world. 
109. The international community had repeatedly voiced its concern at the Israeli 
attitude through various resolutions in the General Assembly as well as the Agency yet 
nothing had been done to remedy the situation. 
110. At all events, his delegation hoped that the resolution just adopted, despite its 
shortcomings, would represent a further step towards the establishment of a zone free 
from nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 22 

111. Mr. EL FADHEL KHALIL (Tunisia) said that his country, as a signatory of 
the Pelindaba Treaty, declaring Africa to be a NWFZ, fervently wished that the Middle 
East become likewise, as that would enhance African security, and indeed the 
Pelindaba Treaty mentioned that. 
112. He wished to stress the spirit of co-operation shown by the Arab countries in 
withdrawing the 1996 draft resolution, with its modest additions reflecting resolutions 
or declarations made by developed countries, and substituting the 1995 resolution. 
113. Mr. WALKER (Australia) said that, like the European Union, Australia 
found it regrettable that two years running the Conference could adopt a resolution on 
the Middle East without reflecting the views of the international community as 
expressed by 178 parties to the NPT at the Review and Extension Conference in New 
York in 1995. The resolution adopted there should apply to the present case as 
everywhere else. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 23 

114. Mr. FRANK(Israel), commending all concerned on reaching a compromise, 
said that Israel had joined the consensus, because making the Middle East a NWFZ 
in due course was part of his Government's policy. However, Israel did not agree with 
all the provisions of the resolution just adopted, and for clarification purposes he 
wished to restate his Government's position on the nuclear issue, which was based on 
four principles. 
115. The first principle related to comprehensiveness: the nuclear issue should be 
dealt with in the context of the peace process and of all the regional security problems, 
both conventional and non-conventional. 
116. The second principle related to the regional framework: nuclear nonproliferation 
in the Middle East would be achieved and be seen to be achieved only 
by establishing the Middle East as a mutually verifiable NWFZ in due course. 
117. The third principle related to the need for a step-by-step approach: for reasons 
of practicality, it was necessary to begin the process with confidence-and securitybuilding 
measures, with the establishment of peace relations and with reconciliation, 
dealing in due course with conventional and non-conventional arms control, priority 
being given to systems which experience had shown to be destructive and 
destabilizing. 
118. The fourth principle related to the primacy of the peace process: negotiations 
on all the issues concerned with the security of the region had to be free and direct as 
they in fact were in the bilateral and multilateral talks taking place within the 
framework of the peace process. Israel invited all Member States to respect the 
inviolability of the peace process, in which all issues pertaining to peace in all its 
aspects had been or would ultimately be taken up. 

119. Israel did not wish the General Conference to become an arena for political 
protests or a venue for political discrimination. That was inconsistent with the 
functions and responsibilities of the Agency, as laid down in the Statute. 
120. In conclusion, he said his delegation hoped sincerely for a better future with 
peace and reconciliation in the Middle East. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 24 

CLOSING OF THE SESSION 

121. Mr. KASEMSARN (Thailand), speaking as President of the Conference at 
its previous session, said he wished on behalf of all present to congratulate 
Mr. Padolina on his skilful leadership. The Conference had benefited greatly from his 
ability and experience as an academician, scientist and diplomat, and the Philippines 
should be proud of his achievements and his contributions to the noble work of the 
IAEA. 
122. Mr. WALKER (Australia), associating himself with the previous speaker, 
said he wished to express heartfelt appreciation to the President for the wisdom, 
patience and forbearance he had displayed in bringing the 1996 General Conference 
to a successful conclusion. 
123. The PRESIDENT, expressing gratitude for those kind words, said that it 
had been a great honour for him and the Philippines to serve as President at the 
fortieth regular session of the General Conference and he wished to thank all 
concerned for the co-operation and assistance extended to him in the conduct of 
business and the solving of difficulties, as a result of which the Conference had been 
able to adopt decisions on all items requiring action to be taken. 
124. He issued a reminder and a plea to all Member States and the Secretariat to see 
that all the decisions were implemented and work carried out on schedule, so that the 
General Conference could take appropriate actions in 1997. 
125. He particularly wished to thank his colleagues in the General Committee, whose 
support had made his task much easier, and also, on behalf of all, to thank Mr. 
Ayatollahi, the Chairman, and his Vice-Chairmen for managing so competently the 
work of the Committee of the Whole. 
126. Thanks were also due to the Director General and all concerned in the 
Secretariat, in particular Mr. Sanmuganathan, for their tireless efforts to ensure the 
success of the Conference. 

GC(40)/OR.10 
page 25 

127. Finally, on behalf of the Conference, he wished to thank the Austrian authorities 
for their kind hospitality and support for the Agency. 
128. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure, he invited all delegations 
to observe a minute's silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose 

and 

observed 

silence 

for 

one 

minute. 

129. The PRESIDENT declared the fortieth session of the General Conference 
closed. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

12.20 
a.m. 

GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
September 1996 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH (1 996 ) REGULAR SESSION 
GENERAL COMMITTEE 
RECORD OF THE FIRST MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 16 September 1996, at 2.35 p.m. 
Item of the 
provisional 
agenda* 
-
CONTENTS 
Adoption of the Committee's agenda 
Paragraphs 
1 -3 
5 Arrangements for the Conference 
(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation 
of items for initial discussion 
4 -13 
4 -9 
(b) Closing date of the session and 
opening date of the next session 10 -13 
-Restoration of voting rights 14 -42 
[*] GC(40)/1. 
96-03437 (XXI) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or

incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency,

Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt

of the record. 


GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 2 

ATTENDANCE AT THE MEETING 
Chairman 
Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines), President of the General Conference 

Members 

Mr. WALKER (Canada), Vice-President of the General Conference 

Mr. DASQUE, representing Mr. D'ESCATHA (France), Vice-President of the 

General Conference 
Mr. SURYOKUSUMO (Indonesia), Vice-President of the General Conference 
Mr. INOMATA, representing Mr. NAKAGAWA (Japan), Vice-President of the 

General Conference 
Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon), Vice-President of the General Conference 
Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco), Vice-President of the General Conference 
Mr. ARGÜELLOHURTADO(Nicaragua), Vice-Presidentofthe GeneralConference 
Mr. KONACHKOV, representing Mr. MIKHAILOV (Russian Federation), 

Vice-President of the General Conference 
Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran), Chairman of the Committee of the 

Whole 
Ms. BEŠKER (Croatia), Additional Member 
Mr. MICHAELIDES (Cyprus), Additional Member 
Mr. ALEMAYEHU (Ethiopia), Additional Member 
Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico), Additional Member 
Mr. MAZILU, representing Mr. PALADE (Romania), Additional Member 
Mr. SNYDER, representing Ms. O'LEARY(United States of America), Additional 

Member 

Secretariat 

Mr. STURMS, Director, Legal Division 
Mr. SANMUGANATHAN, Secretary of the Committee 



GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 3 

ADOPTION OF THE COMMITTEE'S AGENDA (GC(40)/GEN/1) 

1. The CHAIRMAN pointed out that, in addition to the traditional item 
"Arrangements for the Conference", the provisional agenda contained an item dealing 
with requests for the restoration of voting rights. 
2. If there were no objections, he would take it that the Committee wished to 
adopt the agenda proposed in document GC(40)/GEN/1. 
3. It was so decided. 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) 
ADOPTIONOFTHEAGENDAANDALLOCATIONOFITEMSFORINITIALDISCUSSION 
(GC(40)/1) 
List of items 

4. The CHAIRMAN said he took it that the Committee wished to recommend 
to the Conference that the agenda for the current session consist of all the items listed 
in document GC(40)/1. 
5. It was 

so 

decided. 

Allocation of items for initial discussion and order of items 

6. The CHAIRMAN drew attention to the annotations in document GC(40)/1 
containing suggestions as to where the substance of individual items might first be 
discussed. The order of items would be agreed by the Committee on the 
understanding that circumstances or the efficient conduct of business might call for 
changes to be made by the Plenary or the Committee of the Whole, with adequate 
notice being given of such changes. 
7. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco)saiditwasparticularlyimportant, inthecase 
of agenda item 19 on Article VI of the Statute, that sub-item (a) concerning the 
amendment of Article VI should be considered prior to sub-item (b) on the composition 
of regional groups. 

GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 4 

8. The CHAIRMAN said he took it that the Committee wished to recommend 
to the General Conference the allocation of items for initial discussion and the order 
of items set forth in document GC(40)/1. 
9. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
10. The CHAIRMAN said that, although some 80 delegates had already 
entered their names on the speakers' list for the general debate, he considered that 
the Committee should recommend to the Conference that the closing date of the 
session be Friday, 20 September 1996. 
11. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

12. The CHAIRMAN proposed that the Committee recommend to the 
Conference that the opening date of the 1997 regular session of the General 
Conference be Monday, 29 September. 
13. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (GC(40)/INF/6 and 8) 

14. TheCHAIRMAN saidthatrequestsfortherestorationofvotingrightshad 
been received from Iraq, which had explained its case in document GC(40)/INF/6, and 
Peru, which had explained its case in document GC(40)/INF/8. The Committee's task 
was to recommend to the General Conference whether or not it should accede to those 
requests. Under Article XIX.A of the Statute, the General Conference could permit a 
Member State disqualified from voting because of defaults in the payment of its 
contributions to vote if it was satisfied that the failure to pay was due to conditions 
beyond the Member State's control. 
15. Document GC(40)/INF/11, "Statement of financial contributions to the Agency 
as at 13 September 1996", listed the countries in arrears in the payment of financial 
contributions within the meaning of Article XIX.A of the Statute. 

GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 5 

16. Mr. ARGÜELLO HURTADO (Nicaragua) said that he had been asked to 
transmit to the Committee a note verbale from the Permanent Mission of Bolivia dated 
16 September 1996 announcing that the Government of Bolivia had authorized 
payment of the minimum amount required according to document GC(40)/INF/11 for 
Bolivia to avoid the application of Article XIX.A and participate fully in the current 
session. 
17. The CHAIRMAN said he took it that the Committee wished to accept the 
note verbale1 for consideration under the current item. 
18. It was so decided . 

19. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco), referring to Iraq's request in document 
GC(40)/INF/6, said that the second sentence of Article XIX.A of the Statute was clearly 
applicable to that Member State since its failure to pay its contributions was due to 
conditions beyond its control, namely the fact that its assets abroad had been frozen. 
He stressed that his argument was based on a strictly legal interpretation of the article 
and took no account of the political dimensions of the issue. Moreover, he fully 
respected the relevant Security Council resolutions concerning Iraq. 
20. Quoting from an information note published by the United Nations Industrial 
DevelopmentOrganization(UNIDO)on10September 1996,hesaidthatanopen-ended 
discussion group set up to study applicable measures to expedite timely payment of 
assessed contributions had, inter alia, proposed a model procedure for dealing with 
cases similar to those currently before the Committee. Where a body found that a 
Member State's failure to pay was due to conditions beyond its control and that it 
should therefore be permitted to vote, the body's report on that decision should, under 
the model procedure, explain the nature of the conditions concerned, review financial 
relations between the Member State and the organization over the previous ten years, 
and indicate the measures that should be taken to settle the arrears. In his view, such 
Subsequently issued as document GC(40)/INF/15. 


GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 6 

a procedure should be applicable as a matter of principle throughout the United 
Nations system. 

21. Mr. SNYDER (United States of America) said that he could not accept the 
argument that the freezing of Iraqi assets abroad pursuant to Security Council 
resolutions created conditions that were beyond the control of the Government of Iraq. 
If Iraq complied with the provisions of the resolutions concerned, the Security Council 
sanctions would immediately be lifted and its assets would be released. 
22. In reply to a question by Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Chairman of the Committee 
of the Whole), the CHAIRMAN said that Iraq's request for restoration of voting rights 
had been rejected at the thirty-eighth and thirty-ninth sessions of the General 
Conference. 
23. Mr. KONACHKOV(RussianFederation)saidthathewasinclinedtosupport 
the statement by the delegate of Morocco in view of the need to keep the Agency free 
from ideological influences and to maintain its universality. 
24. Mr. DASQUE (France) said that, having consulted representatives of other 
Member States of the European Union, he considered that the situation did not justify 
changing the policy on Iraqi voting rights adopted at the previous two sessions. He 
was not convinced that Iraq's failure to pay its contributions was due to conditions 
beyond its control, since its inability to effect the necessary financial transactions was 
an indirect consequence of Iraqi policy. 
25. Mr. WALKER (Canada) said that he shared the views expressed by the 
representatives of the United States and France. 
26. Mr. AYATOLLAHI (Chairman of the Committee of the Whole) suggested 
that since there were two possible approaches to the issue, one strictly legalistic and 
the other involving sensitive political considerations, the matter should be referred to 
the Plenary. 
27. Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) said that she did not think it appropriate 
to refer the matter to the Plenary. It was customary for the General Committee to seek 

GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 7 

a consensus on all questions placed before it. A majority of Committee members 
appeared to be against restoring Iraq's voting rights and her own view was that the 
Agency should respect the resolutions of the Security Council and their implications for 
all member bodies of the United Nations system. 

28. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that he knew of no Security Council 
resolution that expressly prohibited the granting of voting rights to Iraq in 
organizations of the United Nations system. 
29. The CHAIRMAN, noting that there no other speakers, said that he took it 
that the Committee did not wish to recommend that Iraq be permitted to vote pursuant 
to the second sentence of Article XIX.A of the Statute. 
30. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

31. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco)saidhewishedittobeplacedonrecordthat 
the decision just taken had not been unanimous and had been motivated by political 
rather than legal considerations. 
32. The CHAIRMAN, replying to a question by Mr. DASQUE (France), said that 
the payment announced by the Government of Peru in document GC(40)/INF/8 had 
been received by the Agency. 
33. In reply to a question by Mr. INOMATA (Japan), Mr. SANMUGANATHAN 
(Secretary of the Committee) said that there was no consistent General Conference 
practice with respect to the restoration of Member States' voting rights under 
ArticleXIX.AoftheStatute. Somerequestshadbeengrantedatprevioussessionsand 
others had been refused. 
34. Mr. INOMATA (Japan)saidthathewouldagreetotherestorationofPeru's 
voting rights provided that such action did not set a precedent either for the General 
Conference or for other organizations of the United Nations system. 
35. The CHAIRMAN said he took it that the Committee wished to recommend 
that the Conference permit Peru to vote pursuant to the second sentence of Article 
XIX.A of the Statute. 

GC(40)/GEN/OR.1 
page 8 

36. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

37. Mr. ARGÜELLO HURTADO (Nicaragua), referring to the request made by 
Bolivia, said that the Permanent Mission had announced a payment of US $81 000 for 
18 September 1996. He recommended that the Committee acknowledge Bolivia's 
financial effort and the confidence it had shown in the Agency's work. 
38. Mr. MAZILU(Romania)andMr. BENMOUSSA(Morocco)saidthattheywere 
prepared, as an exception, to support the restoration of Bolivia's voting rights. 
39. The CHAIRMAN said he took it that the Committee wished to recommend 
that the Conference permit Bolivia to vote pursuant to the second sentence of Article 
XIX.A of the Statute. 
40. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

41. The CHAIRMAN proposed that the Committee meet again as a credentials 
committee, in accordance with Rule 28 of the Rules of Procedure, on Thursday, 
19 September 1996, at 9.15 a.m. 
42. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

3.35 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
January 1997 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL 


Original: FRENCH 

CONFERENCE 


FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SECOND PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 16 September 1996, at 3.45 p.m. 

President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 

CONTENTS 
Item 

of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 

7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (resumed) 1-86 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Pakistan 1 -15 
Islamic Republic of Iran 16 -36 
China 37 -51 
Lebanon 52 -58 
Syrian Arab Republic 59 -67 
Philippines 68 -86 

5 Arrangements for the Conference 
87 -93 

(a) 
Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items 
for initial discussion 87 -91 
(b) 
Closing date of the session and opening date of 
the next session 92 -93 
-Requests for the restoration of voting rights (resumed) 94 -101 
7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (resumed) 102 -124 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Nigeria 
Ecuador 
102 
117 
-
-
116 
124 

[*] GC(40)/1. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 
96-03340 (XXV)


This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.2 
page 2 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASEAN 
Basic Safety 
Standards 

CANDU 
NPT 
NPT Review and 
Exte n 

OAU 
Pelindaba Treaty 
RCA 

R&D 
SAGTAC 

TCDC 
TCF 

Abbreviations 

used 

in 

this 

record 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
RegionalCo-operative Arrangementsforthe Promotion ofNuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 

International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against 
Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 
Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

sion Conference 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Organization of African Unity 
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 
RegionalCo-operative AgreementforResearch, Developmentand 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Research and development 
Standing Advisory Group on Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 


GC(40)/OR.2 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (resumed) 

1. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan), after welcoming the Republic of Moldova as a 
member of the Agency, pointed out that it was 100 years since the nuclear age had 
begun with the discovery of radioactivity. Fifty years later, the discovery of nuclear 
fission had opened new avenues for both the destructive and constructive uses of 
nuclear energy. Regrettably, the immense might of the atom had been used first for 
destructive purposes, and only later harnessed for constructive ends. Fortunately, there 
were signs that lessons were being drawn from past mistakes -albeit belatedly -and 
that the threat was diminishing. 
2. Pakistan supported all the efforts made to achieve the objectives of nuclear 
disarmament and non-proliferation. It believed that the competent authorities of the 
United Nations should have the means to tackle such problems, and regretted that the 
Conference on Disarmament had been unable to submit to the United Nations a 
consensus text for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Pakistan supported 
the objectives of the Treaty, which would only come into being if all countries which 
had a nuclear capability acceded to it. 
3. Pakistan wished to see the whole world, and in particular its own region of 
South Asia, free of nuclear weapons. It was encouraged by the progress made in 
recent years to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in different parts of the world, an 
objective that Pakistan had been advocating at the United Nations General Assembly 
since 1972. Pakistan had made a number of other proposals and was willing to enter 
into bilateral negotiations with its neighbour on any fair and equitable proposal for 
establishing a non-proliferation regime that would ensure peace and stability in the 
region. 
4. While international agreements imposed certain restrictions, surveillance and 
verification mechanisms were equally important. In that context, the Agency's 
safeguards system had been notably successful. Safeguards had failed only rarely in 
almost 40 years of existence, but the unfortunate publicity resulting from those failures 
had eroded public confidence in a system that functioned remarkably well. Naturally, 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 4 

any system could be improved, and Pakistan supported the efforts to strengthen the 
effectiveness and improve the efficiency of safeguards. Programme 93+2 was a step 
in that direction. However, it would be necessary to give careful consideration to the 
outstanding issues and employ an acceptable methodology. The important thing was 
to take time to analyse all the Programme's implications in order to avoid the risk of 
its implementation being delayed by conflicting interpretations of the new shared 
obligations. Programme 93+2 was intended for countries which had concluded 
INFCIRC/153-type safeguards agreements with the Agency and the proposals to extend 
the Programme to countries without comprehensive safeguards agreements were 
contrary to the spirit of the Programme. 

5. Safeguards and non-proliferation were only one aspect of the nuclear issue. An 
equally, if not more, important issue mentioned specifically in the Agency's Statute was 
the promotion of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. The most significant contribution 
that nuclear technology could make to global peace and development was to enhance 
the security of energy supplies for developing countries that were deficient in fuel. 
Nuclear power accounted for approximately one sixth of world electricity production, 
but only a very small fraction was produced in the Third World, where sustainable 
energy supply systems were urgently needed. In that regard, it was important to win 
the public understanding and support that were indispensable to all areas of science 
and technology, and particularly in the field of nuclear energy. The effective role 
played by Mr. Hans Blix as ambassador for nuclear energy was well known, 
particularly in its economic and ecological dimensions. It was now up to the scientists, 
engineers, managers and planners in the Agency and its Member States to try to give 
the public a fair and accurate idea of the many and varied benefits that could stem 
from the peaceful exploitation of nuclear energy, not only for electricity production, but 
also for desalination. It was encouraging to note the renewed interest on the part of 
the Agency and some Member States in small and medium power reactors designed 
for that purpose. Pakistan had participated actively in that discussion and would 
continue to support the action taken by the Secretariat. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 5 

6. Nuclear energy carried a heavy legacy as a result of Hiroshima and Chernobyl, 
the first of which called for safeguards, non-proliferation and disarmament measures, 
and the second for measures to improve the safety of nuclear facilities. Pakistan 
attached high priority to the safety of nuclear facilities and had derived great benefit 
from the expertise made available through the Agency. The international Convention 
on Nuclear Safety would soon enter into force, and he hoped that the Agency would 
ensure the fullest possible exchange of safety-related information and expertise, as 
stipulated in the Convention. Pakistan would ratify the Convention as soon as the 
necessary legislative and administrative procedures had been completed. 
7. The Agency's promotional activities were best reflected in its technical cooperation 
programme. He noted with satisfaction that over the previous year the 
overall financial implementation rate had reached a record 75.7%, resulting in a 
substantial increase in the number of fellowships, expert assignments and training 
courses. Pakistan was grateful to the Department of Technical Co-operation and other 
technical Divisions of the Agency for their excellent work. It also wished to pay tribute 
to those donor countries which honoured their commitment to support technical cooperation. 
Although voluntary, the contributions helped to support a vital function of 
the Agency, and Pakistan urged all Member States to pay their contributions in full and 
in a timely manner. For its part, Pakistan had always done so, and he was pleased 
to announce that it pledged its full share of the target of the TCF for 1997. 
8. Pakistan had derived great benefit from the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme in various fields: nuclear energy, nuclear safety, agriculture, medicine, and 
research and development. At the same time, it had made a modest contribution by 
providing experts, lecturers and training facilities at its establishments. Moreover, 
Pakistan's experience and expertise were, through the Agency, available to specialists 
and technicians from other developing Member States in line with the philosophy of 
TCDC which had repeatedly been endorsed by the United Nations. That philosophy, 
which was based on recognition of the fact that different levels of technological 
advancement existed among developing countries, could, if applied in good faith, lead 
tomutualbenefits. Inthecurrentclimateofinternationalfinancialausterity,TCDChad 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 6 

the advantage of offering a good cost-effectiveness ratio. Pakistan urged the Agency 
to devote particular attention to the issue in its strategic planning of technology 
transfer. 

9. Turning to the main activities carried out in Pakistan in the area of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy, he said that the construction work on the Chashma nuclear 
power plant was proceeding according to schedule. The reactor dome had been 
completed the previous November, and the installation ofthe equipment had commenced. 
10. The Karachi nuclear power plant would celebrate 25 years of safe operation in 
October. Despite embargoes, the plant had performed well. Peer reviews carried out 
by the World Association of Nuclear Operators and by expert missions from the Agency 
and the CANDU Owners Group had confirmed that the plant was in good condition. 
Pakistan was confident that the plant could continue to operate satisfactorily for a 
further 10-15 years. 
11. In the agricultural sector, Pakistan had developed, over the past year, new 
varieties of wheat, rice and cotton through mutation breeding techniques. He was 
pleased to learn that the Agency was preparing an interregional project on the 
sustainable use of wasteland and saline groundwater for plant production. Pakistan 
would be pleased to offer other Member States the benefit of the experience gained 
by its National Institute of Agriculture and Biology. 
12. Cancer diagnostic and treatment services had been available throughout 
Pakistan for many years. The programme was a very successful one and some 240 
000 patients were now being treated each year. Owing to financial constraints in the 
public sector, efforts were now being made to encourage the private sector to 
participate in the further development of nuclear medicine and radiotherapy in 
Pakistan. 
13. Research and development activities were essential for the advancement of 
science and technology. The Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology had 
been providing support to other institutions with regard to the production of isotopes 
and in various fields of R&D. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 7 

14. The Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory Board, which laid down policy in matters 
related to nuclear safety and radiation protection, had approved regulations on food 
irradiation in Pakistan. 
15. Finally, Pakistan noted with satisfaction that the Agency's performance in the 
past year had been as good as in previous years. That was largely a result of the 
Secretariat's efficiency, but also the work of the Policy-making Organs. Nevertheless, 
there was a feeling that the efficiency and representative character of the Board of 
Governors would be enhanced by the prudent addition of more Member States. 
Proposals to that end had been submitted recently by Morocco, Spain and Pakistan. 
It was high time for the Agency's Member States to address the issue seriously and 
respond to the urgent need for an appropriate increase in the size of the Board. 
16. Mr. AMROLLAHI (Islamic Republic of Iran) said that the nuclear threat 
faced by mankind for the past 50 years and the increasing need for clean sources of 
energy placed a daunting responsibility on the international community. Despite the 
end of the Cold War and the collapse of the bipolar order, there was always the 
danger that new poles would develop and that new confrontations would arise. There 
was still no assurance of the complete destruction of nuclear arsenals so the world was 
not yet rid of the nuclear threat. The reverberations of recent nuclear tests showed 
that universality of the NPT had not yet been achieved. 
17. Developments such as the end of the Cold War, the slowing down of the arms 
race, the indefinite extension of the NPT and the gradual consolidation of links 
between its complementary treaties, and the promotion of the peaceful applications of 
nuclear science and technology gave room for hope. However, if such hopes were to 
divert the international community, even for a moment, from moving towards a world 
that was freed from the nuclear threat but that benefited from the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, it would be difficult to avoid the pitfalls ahead and to 
provide for the needs of future generations. 
18. The decision to extend the NPT indefinitely, taken at the 1995 NPT Review and 
Extension Conference, had demonstrated the international community's commitment 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 8 

to the objectives of complete elimination of nuclear weapons and promotion of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. In his statement to the 1995 session of the General 
Conference, the Director General had interpreted the extension as a collective 
commitment to bring about a world in which nuclear energy was used for positive, 
peaceful purposes and in which no nation possessed any nuclear weapons. In the 
context of such a clear reality, insistence on the discarded doctrine of two poles "
nuclear" and "non-nuclear"-was in conflict with global commitments. The disastrous 
consequences of maintaining such an "apartheid" would be the continuation of a 
fundamentally illegitimate race to acquire nuclear weapons and the refusal of nuclearweapon 
States to take serious steps to destroy their arsenals. Thus the nuclear option 
would remain for many years a tool whereby States with nuclear weapons could 
threaten those without, which could only be interpreted as a move away from the 
ideal of peace, health and well-being for all peoples of the world. 

19. To achieve the objectives of the NPT, the primary responsibility for creating 
confidence within the international community lay with the nuclear-weapon States. 
To hesitate in destroying nuclear weapons, to continue nuclear weapons testing and, 
more seriously, to threaten to deploy nuclear weapons was incompatible with that 
responsibility at the dawn of a "new order" that appeared to promise peace, 
development and protection of human rights. 
20. Regrettably, despite the global consensus against the nuclear threat that had 
emergedattheNPTReview andExtensionConference, andnotwithstandingthewords 
of the representative of the Government claiming leadership in the global efforts to 
extend the Treaty indefinitely, the highest-ranking military official of that country had 
made a clear threat to deploy nuclear weapons in the region of the Middle East. The 
statements made by the Secretary of Defence of the United States of America in 
March 1996 indicating his country's readiness to use nuclear weapons to defend the 
Zionist régime had shattered the global consensus on the need to strengthen the NPT 
and undermined all the initiatives aimed at creating a climate of confidence. The 
Islamic Republic of Iran regretted and abhorred that clear threat to world peace and 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 9 

security and asked the international community to adopt an unambiguous position on 
the issue. 

21. In any collective move towards the complete destruction of nuclear weapons, 
it was vital to stop the production and use of fissile material for nuclear weapons. The 
international community should therefore give its full support to the finalization of a 
convention to prohibit the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other 
nuclear explosive devices. It must be stressed, however, that any international treaty 
on the subject should clearly define the boundary between the production of nuclear 
material for weapons and the production of nuclear material for peaceful purposes. 
Ambiguity in that area could well serve as grounds for implementation of the current 
biased policies and the introduction of illegitimate political objectives in the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. 
22. In view of the Middle East's long record of military, political and historical 
conflict, it was necessary to eliminate all weapons of mass destruction in that region 
in order to implement fully the provisions of the NPT there. Iran, which twenty years 
previously had been the first country to propose the establishment of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in the sensitive region of the Middle East, supported the resolutions 
on the subject adopted by the United Nations, the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference and the General Conference. 
23. Israel's failure to conform to the provisions of the NPT had so far prevented a 
global consensus being reached on the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the Middle East and was a real danger to peace and security in the region and in 
the world. Regrettably, that policy was supported by countries which claimed to be 
champions of the NPT and which had assumed the roles of public prosecutor, defence 
attorney, jury and judge rolled into one on a global scale. Considering the complexity 
of global security issues, no country's one-sided views that gave priority to national 
concerns instead of international considerations could be accepted. 
24. Linking the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East to 
the establishment by the Zionist régime of a so-called "peace" there, which it had 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 10 

widely publicized, promoted the arms race in the region and clearly violated the 
principle of non-proliferation by undermining the efforts made to strengthen it. 
Legitimizing such a trend and supporting it, for whatever reason, encouraged policies 
of threat and blackmail in international relations. One could expect similar situations 
to develop in other regions with similar security problems. The General Conference 
and the international community should state loudly and clearly that the right to live 
in security, even under the assumption of legitimacy, could not be used as a pretext 
for confiscating the lands of others, violating the rights of other nations, flouting 
credible international treaties and making nuclear threats. 

25. The Arab Summit Conference held in Cairo in June 1996, which had stressed 
the need to establish a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the region of the 
Middle East, had been the latest and most comprehensive expression of the 
commitment of Arab and Muslim countries to an important objective of the NPT. Their 
appeal should not remain unanswered. The Islamic Republic of Iran endorsed the 
broad consensus that had emerged. 
26. Nuclear accidents, because of their transboundary dimensions, could not be 
considered to be the problem of an individual country. It was therefore regrettable 
that the reports and information concerning the radioactive leaks at the Dimona 
"research" reactor in Israel and the hazards linked to the disposal of radioactive waste 
within the vicinity of the reactor had not received the appropriate coverage and 
response. The reports had only added to the concerns in the Middle East region about 
Israel's non-transparent nuclear activities and its refusal to place its nuclear activities 
under international supervision. The useful life of the reactor in question had long 
since expired, the facility did not conform to international safety rules and, furthermore, 
it was located in an uncontrollable region. 
27. The deep concerns of the Islamic Republic of Iran had been conveyed to the 
Director General in a letter dated 10 April 1996. The Arab Member States of the 
Agency and of the Board of Governors in a letter to the Director General of the Agency, 
and the Secretary-General of the League of Arab States in a letter to the United 
Nations Secretary-General, to the Security Council and to the IAEA, had called for 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 11 

emergency intervention. Regrettably, the response of the Zionist régime had been 
neither convincing nor reassuring, and the reactor continued to pose a threat. The 
Islamic Republic of Iran therefore requested the Agency to continue its investigations 
into that problem. 

28. The establishment of nuclear security in the world of the future and the 
promotion of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy depended on the Agency, 
which should implement safeguards in a clear, unprejudiced and fair manner, should 
detect violations and above all adopt strong measures in the event of non-compliance. 
The 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference had emphasized the Agency's central 
role in international co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in 
verifying Governments' compliance with their non-proliferation commitments. The 
Conference had clearly recognized that the Agency was the body responsible for 
monitoring the implementation of safeguards. In that connection, it had requested the 
Parties to direct their concerns regarding possible safeguards violations together with 
any supporting evidence and information to the Agency so that it could consider, 
investigate, draw conclusions and decide on necessary actions. The rationale behind 
that request, which was aimed at preserving the credibility of the Treaty and 
strengthening confidence within the international community, was that it was 
preferable to benefit from the expertise and experience of a neutral arbitrator than to 
be misled by arbitrators pursuing specific political objectives. 
29. The baseless allegations frequently made by the United States and the Zionist 
régime about Iran's so-called non-peaceful nuclear activities undermined the NPT 
regime and caused international anxiety. More seriously, those allegations seemed to 
contain open or veiled threats to destroy Iran's peaceful nuclear installations! The fact 
that no tangible evidence of nuclear activities in Iran had been passed to the Agency 
was surely proof in itself that such allegations were groundless. How could the 
international community allow such an important global treaty to be attacked in such 
a way and the Agency slighted? How could it allow a treaty aimed at strengthening 
world security to become merely a tool for furthering illegitimate political aims and 
punishing independent countries which did not tolerate interference? The Iranian 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 12 

delegation considered the Director General's position that, on the basis of the evidence 
and the results of safeguards activities, the allegations of non-peaceful nuclear 
activities in Iran were without foundation to be sufficient and final. 

30. In the course of the past forty years, the Agency, within the framework of its 
Statute, had taken important steps to promote non-proliferation. Non-nuclear-weapon 
States, particularly in the developing world, were seriously concerned about the way 
in which the Agency currently operated and the effectiveness of its monitoring of 
States' nuclear activities in response to global power diplomacy and its political 
consequences. The realization of the ideal at which those countries aimed, namely, 
a world free of the nuclear threat, in which the nuclear activities of all countries would 
be put under Agency supervision in a totally transparent manner, required joint action. 
In the sensitive region of the Middle East, Israel's resistance to the non-proliferation 
regime had hitherto been the main obstacle to the Agency's efforts in the area of 
safeguards. Its insistence on the expansion and strengthening of safeguards, despite 
its refusal to submit to them, supported unequivocally by certain world powers, could 
only be interpreted as an attempt to undermine the national sovereignty of other 
States in the region which complied with their international obligations. 
31. International consensus, which was an indispensable condition for 
strengthening the Agency's safeguards, could only be based on a balance between the 
respective obligations of the nuclear-weapon and non-nuclear-weapon States under 
the non-proliferation regime and could not ignore the right to national sovereignty and 
the bias and unfairness in the implementation of that regime. Consultations should 
accordingly continue until a consensus emerged; the Agency's ability to implement 
safeguards in an equitable manner was a prerequisite for their widespread acceptance 
and survival. 
32. In the new energy policies of the Islamic Republic of Iran, which was fortunate 
in being endowed with large and relatively cheap fossil fuel resources, investments in 
clean energy production had a special place. Those policies took into account new 
models of sustained development, the need to preserve freedom of choice for future 
generations and the long-term effects of population growth on energy consumption. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 13 

Considerable effort had accordingly been made to produce energy using water, wind 
and the sun. At the same time, since those energy sources would not account for a 
substantial share of the total energy output for several decades at least, the Atomic 
Energy Organization of Iran had decided to make major investments in nuclear power, 
which, according to the Agency, was one of the cleanest methods of electricity 
production. Commercial operation of the first unit of the Bushehr nuclear power plant 
would start at the end of the Republic's second five-year development plan, providing 
it with the electricity generating capacity to meet almost the total demand. 

33. The Agency's key role in technical co-operation for promoting the peaceful uses 
of nuclear technology was irrefutable. That role had been duly recognized at the NPT 
Review and Extension Conference, and the Agency had been commended for its 
technical assistance and co-operation programmes. At the thirty-ninth regular session 
of the General Conference, the Director General of the Agency had reported important 
new developments in that connection. The Agency's programmes to promote technical 
co-operation between developing countries had led to positive results. The success 
of the Agency's current programmes in that area, particularly the implementation of 
technical projects in some countries by those more advanced in the particular field 
involved, could lead to the further enhancement of peaceful nuclear activities in the 
developing countries. The expansion ofsuch co-operation would undoubtedly improve 
confidence and transparency between States and the Agency. 
34. The Agency's technical co-operation programmes in Iran had greatly helped the 
progress of the country's nuclear industry. The Atomic Energy Organization of Iran was 
now ready to transfer to countries which so desired its scientific and technical skills 
in the fields of agriculture, medicine, isotopes and research and development 
programmes. 
35. A non-proliferation regime could not be established without first creating a 
co-ordinated, solid system to combat the illegal transfers of fissile materials. The 
Agency had a useful role to play in that connection, but the fundamental responsibility 
of States with nuclear materials and technologies could not be overlooked. 
Furthermore, the negative effects of certain exaggerated reports disseminated by the 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 14 

media for political reasons should not be underestimated. The international 
community, and the Agency in particular, should strive to re-establish the truth. 

36. The promotion of the Agency's role in the years ahead to achieve the objectives 
of non-proliferation, and particularly the principles and objectives of the NPT Review 
and Extension Conference, might give rise to political conflicts. Iran earnestly hoped 
that the Agency would succeed in avoiding the pitfalls and his country was ready to 
support the Agency's independent efforts to attain the objectives of world peace. 
37. Mr. JIANG (China), having congratulated the Republic of Moldova on its 
admission as a new member of the Agency, noted that as the Agency prepared to mark 
its fortieth anniversary, it was important to keep in mind, when reviewing the past 
and envisaging the future, the two objectives set out in the Agency's Statute, namely 
that: 
"The Agency shall seek to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic 
energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. It shall ensure, 
so far as it is able, that assistance provided by it or at its request or under its 
supervision or control is not used in such a way as to further any military 
purpose." 

China believed that the Agency should adhere to those objectives and, in particular, 
should promote international co-operation for the peaceful use of nuclear energy as 
well as the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons through safeguards and that it should 
strike an appropriate balance between the two. That was the common aspiration of 
all Member States of the Agency, and it was also the basis upon which the Agency 
operated and developed. 

38. The Chinese Government had always attached great importance to the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy and nuclear technology. As was known to all, the fast growth 
of China's economy had led to a pressing need for the development of its energy 
resources: depending on coal alone for the country's energy needs would be 
problematic for China in terms of production, transportation and environmental 
protection. Furthermore, although China was rich in water resources, their geological 
distribution was not ideal. The country therefore needed to develop nuclear power 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 15 

more extensively by the beginning of the twenty-first century, and that was why it 
had decided to build four more nuclear power plants consisting of eight units with a 
total capacity of 6600 MW. In June 1996, the second phase of the main project for the 
Qin Shan nuclear power plant had officially been launched, marking a new stage in 
China's nuclear power plant construction programme. It was estimated that by the 
year 2010, China's total nuclear power generation capacity would be 20 000 MW. 

39. In developing nuclear power, China attached great importance to international 
co-operation on an equal and mutually beneficial basis. It had already concluded 
intergovernmental or ministerial agreements on co-operation in the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy with some 20 countries and had established technical co-operation and 
trading relationships with more than 40 countries and regions. The construction of the 
300 MW nuclear power plant that China had exported to Pakistan was now 
progressing smoothly: in November 1995, the reactor building had been completed 
and the installation of equipment had started. Construction of a second nuclear power 
plant, in co-operation with France, had already begun in Guangdong province. In 
addition, bilateral co-operation projects for nuclear power plant construction between 
China and the Russian Federation were being prepared. China was ready to expand 
its co-operation in that area to other countries and international organizations. 
40. In addition to the development of nuclear energy, China had also made great 
progress in the peaceful use of nuclear technology, particularly in promoting industrial 
modernization, achieving the technological innovation of traditional industries and 
raising the living standard of the people. In agriculture, the technique of radiationinduced 
mutations had become widespread throughout China, the sterile insect 
technique had been successfully used in insect control, and the application of isotope 
tracer techniques had improved the utilization of fertilizers and reduced environmental 
pollution caused by pesticide residues. In the area of nuclear medicine, over 1000 
Chinese hospitals were equipped with facilities such as gamma cameras, single photon 
emission tomography systems and cobalt-60 therapy machines. Cobalt-60 therapy 
units developed and manufactured by China had been exported to many developing 
countries through Agency technical assistance projects and had helped to improve the 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 16 

health of local populations. In the field of industry, progress had been made in the 
development and application of nuclear techniques such as radiation processing, 
nuclear logging, non-destructive testing and isotope tracer techniques. 

41. It should be pointed out that all of those achievements were the immediate 
results of the work of Chinese nuclear scientists and engineers and also attributable 
to multilateral or bilateral co-operation. Thanks to the Agency's technical assistance 
and co-operation, China had drawn from the experience acquired by other countries, 
while sharing with others the results of its own efforts. The use of nuclear techniques 
was of great importance in promoting agricultural production, improving human health 
and protecting the environment. In recent years, requests to the Agency from 
developing countries for assistance in those fields had increased. His delegation fully 
supported the Agency's unremitting efforts in the field of technical assistance and cooperation. 
Since the emergence of the Model Project concept, technical co-operation 
was being increasingly focused on end-users, thereby strengthening the economic and 
social impact of nuclear technology for the economic development of the countries 
concerned. The initial success of the first Model Projects had invigorated the Agency's 
technical co-operation activities. New measures taken by the Agency -setting up the 
Country Programme Frameworks and thematic programmes and improving internal 
management -had played a positive role in enhancing the effectiveness and efficiency 
of technical co-operation. 
42. Nevertheless, the new difficulties and challenges in the area of technical cooperation 
should not be underestimated. Firstly, there was an increasingly obvious 
imbalance between the Agency's efforts to strengthen safeguards, on the one hand, 
and to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy on the other. Secondly, reliable 
resources for technical co-operation were lacking, the percentage of pledges in recent 
years remaining stagnant at around 70% of the TCF target and extrabudgetary 
contributions becoming rare. The inadequacy of technical co-operation in the face of 
the pressing demands of Member States was becoming increasingly apparent. In order 
to meet the technical assistance needs of a large number of developing countries, the 
Agency should seriously study the strategic issues involved, including the financing of 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 17 

technical co-operation. It should provide more substantial support for technical cooperation 
in terms of financial and human resources, and SAGTAC's role should be 
reviewed so as to improve the technical co-operation programme and guarantee the 
balanced development of the Agency's promotional and safeguards activities. 

43. Preventing nuclear proliferation was also one of the Agency's objectives. It was 
the Agency's duty to implement safeguards in accordance with its Statute and 
international treaties such as the NPT. In the past year, the Agency had made progress 
in strengthening the effectiveness of the safeguards system and improving its 
efficiency, within the framework of Programme 93+2. The Chinese delegation had 
actively participated from the start in the discussions on that Programme in a serious 
and responsible manner and had put forward many constructive comments and 
suggestions. 
44. China attached great importance to the Agency's work in the area of safeguards 
and would support any appropriate measures that the Agency took to strengthen the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system and improve its efficiency. China believed that 
improvement of the safeguards system should be based on the principles of justice, 
reasonableness and practicality. The new safeguards measures adopted should be 
implemented strictly in accordance with the legal framework of the Agency's Statute 
and the relevant international treaties, in line with the premise that the sovereignty 
of the countries concerned must be respected and their legitimate rights guaranteed. 
Strengthening of safeguards should run parallel with the promotion of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and should not hinder any countries, particularly the developing 
ones, from developing nuclear technology and industry and participating actively in 
international co-operation for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
45. With regard to broader access to information, the Chinese delegation was of the 
opinion that the Agency should make use of and improve its own system for 
information collection and analysis, instead of relying on the technical resources of a 
few countries. To guard against abuse of safeguards information, the Agency should 
work out strict and effective measures to protect confidentiality. With regard to 
increased physical access to specific locations, his delegation was of the view that the 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 18 

necessary criteria and procedures should be established for resolving the question of 
inconsistencies. To prevent the possible abuse of inspections, the Agency must 
establish initial procedures to be used in the event of inconsistencies. For the 
financing of safeguards, both the effectiveness of the safeguards system and its costeffectiveness 
must be taken into consideration; Member States should not be 
overburdened as a result of the strengthening of the system and the balance in the 
allocation of resources among the Agency's main activities should not be affected. 

46. That having been said, his delegation supported the work of the Committee on 
Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards System 
and was participating actively in it. While welcoming the progress made with 
Programme 93+2, his delegation was concerned about certain undercurrents audible 
in recent discussions that might lead to a deviation from the Programme's original 
purpose and complicate matters. China hoped that all sides would value the 
understanding reached and the progress made through extensive consultations and indepth 
discussions, and that the Agency would continue to work for the establishment 
of a just, rational, effective and efficient safeguards system in accordance with the 
orientation that had been clearly confirmed. 
47. China was a peace-loving and responsible country. Its opposition to nuclear 
proliferation was well known, and it had never assisted other countries in developing 
nuclear weapons. As a party to the NPT, China made sure that all the items it 
exported were subject to Agency safeguards and provided no assistance to nuclear 
facilities that were not placed under safeguards. China had never violated its 
international obligations and would never accept the groundless accusations directed 
against it by certain countries. 
48. One of the Agency's important tasks was to enhance nuclear safety and 
international co-operation in managing radioactive waste. He welcomed the fact that, 
thanks to the efforts of all sides, the Convention on Nuclear Safety would enter into 
forceinOctober1996. Ahighlevelofnuclearsafetywasthebasisforthesustainable 
development of nuclear power and one of the key factors in ensuring public 
acceptance of nuclear power. The Convention's entry into force would mark a new 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 19 

stage in the co-operative efforts of the international community to strengthen nuclear 
safety. As one of the countries that had initiated the preparation of the Convention 
and one of the first to sign it, China had deposited its instrument of ratification on 
9 April 1995. It intended earnestly to fulfil its obligations under the Convention and 
further to develop co-operation in the field of nuclear safety with the Agency and other 
countries. 

49. The negotiation and drafting of the convention on the safe management of 
radioactive waste was now under way; the experts involved had convened four 
meetings so far and had reached agreement on many issues, although some 
divergences still existed with regard to the convention's scope of application. His 
delegation believed it should be restricted to radioactive waste derived from civilian 
applications, and that for radioactive waste and spent fuel derived from military uses, 
Member States could refer to the relevant provisions of the aforementioned convention 
on the safe management of radioactive waste. The Chinese delegation hoped that, in 
the context of consultations conducted on an equal footing, the search for common 
ground with due consideration for differences of view, would, with the concerted 
efforts of all involved, enable a universally acceptable convention to be concluded at 
an early date. 
50. The progress made by the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage 
since the previous session of the General Conference in amending the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and in drafting a convention on 
supplementary funding was welcome, although some questions of principle remained 
to be resolved, such as the amount of compensation, the geographical range and the 
definition of nuclear damage. The opinions of all parties should be heard while taking 
into consideration the capabilities of the developed and the developing countries, it 
being understood that any victim of a nuclear accident should be granted timely and 
adequate compensation. Due regard should also be given to the development of 
nuclear industry in developing countries so as to encourage more countries to accede 
to the convention, thereby making it more universal. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 20 

51. If one looked at the activities undertaken by the Agency over the past 40 years, 
it was clear that the Agency bore a tremendous responsibility for preventing nuclear 
proliferation and promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and international 
co-operation in those fields. He was convinced that the Agency would be able to 
contribute still further to the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, provided there was no 
departure from the objectives laid down in the Statute and all Member States made 
concerted efforts. 
52. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon) said that currently the Agency's role was so 
important that it was universally consulted in the event of any nuclear threat or 
accident. He therefore welcomed the establishment by the Agency at Beirut, as part 
of a Model Project, of an office for monitoring nuclear safety in the region of the Middle 
East and Western Asia. Lebanon would make every effort to ensure the success of that 
initiative. 
53. In its determination to make up for lost time, the Lebanese Government had 
submitted three conventions to Parliament, namely the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. All three had been ratified. It also intended in the near future to accede 
to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
54. Welcoming the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa in 
compliance with the Pelindaba Treaty, he said Lebanon would like to see a similar 
zone established in the Middle East. Such a zone was urgently needed and was a 
precondition for lasting peace in the region. Israel's signature of the NPT would be a 
first step towards the establishment of such a zone, but until it did so and placed its 
facilities under Agency safeguards, Israel would remain a danger to its neighbours and 
a threat to world peace. The international community would therefore have to put 
pressure on Israel to accede to the NPT, particularly in view of the fact that it was a 
country which believed in the use of force and violence in its international relations, 
as was evident in its zone of occupation in South Lebanon, in the way it treated 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 21 

civilians and its bombing of a United Nations camp in the village of Kana, which had 
killed and injured hundreds of civilians sheltering there. 

55. With regard to the safeguards system, the Agency's need for information would 
have to be balanced against the need of States to secure their legitimate interests and 
respect their constitutional obligations. The only way to strengthen the effectiveness 
of the safeguards system and improve its efficiency was to apply it uniformly to all 
States. That was particularly true of the Middle East region, where Israel continued 
to refuse to place its facilities under Agency safeguards. 
56. TheamendmentofArticleVIoftheAgency'sStatutewasaveryimportantissue, 
since it could serve as a first step towards more equitable geographical representation 
in the Board of Governors. Lebanon hoped that the General Conference would achieve 
real consensus on the issue, while reaffirming the right of any group to decide on its 
own membership. 
57. Lebanon attached great importance to the safe management of radioactive 
waste and was therefore participating in the meetings of the group of experts drafting 
a convention on the subject and had hosted several workshops and a conference. 
58. Lastly, with regard to technical co-operation, he welcomed the establishment 
of a section with responsibility for technical co-operation programmes in the Middle 
East and Central Asia. The Agency had established three Country Programme 
Frameworks, of which one applied to Lebanon. The fact that assistance provided by 
the Agency had risen from US $8.6 million in 1979 to $13 million in 1995 was the 
best proof that the policy adopted by the Agency on the subject was dynamic and 
sound. 
59. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic), having welcomed the admission of 
the Republic of Moldova to the Agency, applauded the Secretariat's efforts to increase 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy for development purposes. The Agency was 
seeking to enhance co-operation with developing countries in order to meet their 
technological needs, in line with national objectives and the requirements of 
sustainable development. Another noteworthy development was the Agency's 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 22 

improved performance and rationalization of its expenditure, as evidenced by Model 
Projects and Country Programme Frameworks. 

60. The Syrian Arab Republic warmly welcomed the establishment of a nuclearweapon-
free zone in Africa and believed that it was essential to take similar measures 
in neighbouring regions. The establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa 
lost its significance when one considered that to the east of the continent Israel had 
a formidable nuclear arsenal. 
61. Although the General Assembly had recently adopted the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the text of that Treaty took no account of the justified 
concerns of the vast majority of States, which did not have nuclear weapons, since it 
included no commitment on the part of nuclear-weapon States to eliminate their 
arsenals within a reasonable period of time. Furthermore, it did not explicitly preclude 
recourse or threat of recourse to nuclear weapons, nor did it refer to the need to 
ensure the universality of the NPT. The most curious point was that the Treaty 
authorized signatory States to take measures against non-signatory States, which could 
includemeasurestaken bytheSecurityCouncilunderChapter VIIoftheUnitedNations 
Charter. In other words, it interfered with the sovereign right of States to decide freely 
whether or not to accede to the Treaty. The Treaty's deficiencies and, in particular, 
its listing of Israel among the countries of the Middle East and South Asia region -an 
unprecedented step of particular concern in view of the explosive situation prevailing 
in the Middle East because Israel was the only country in the region that possessed 
nuclear weapons -were viewed with grave concern by the Syrian Arab Republic. 
62. The application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East was once again on the 
General Conference's agenda. While various resolutions had been adopted on the 
subject, none had mentioned Israel by name, although it was the only country in the 
region which had nuclear weapons and had consistently refused to accede to the NPT 
or to place its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. Israel's continued 
defiance of international resolutions requiring it to place its nuclear installations under 
Agency safeguards was an open challenge to the international community. Similarly, 
the rejection by Israel of the principles that ought to govern the establishment of a just 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 23 

and lasting peace founded on the resolutions adopted by the Madrid Conference and 
on the "land for peace" principles, the continued occupation of Arab territories and the 
launching of an expansionist operation to establish settlements against the 
international community's wish to make the Middle East a region of peace, security 
and stability were all signs of Israel's refusal to countenance the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East despite the wishes of the countries of the 
region and of the international community. The Syrian Arab Republic therefore 
reiterated its request for adoption of an appropriate resolution on the subject. Failure 
to mention Israel by name in such a resolution would be tantamount to according it 
a further opportunity to evade international resolutions, thus perpetuating tension in 
a zone where the situation was explosive. 

63. With regard to Programme 93+2, the imposition of further stringent restrictions 
on non-nuclear-weapon States was likely to militate against research and development 
and create imbalance and a climate of mistrust among States. It was to be hoped that 
the Programme would not lead to an increased financial burden for Member States that 
were partially exempt. 
64. As far as revision of Article VI of the Agency's Statute was concerned, the 
Director General's report indicated that, according to information provided by the 
United Nations Office of Legal Affairs, the composition of the various groups was 
entirely in the hands of the groups themselves. In addition, paragraph 14 of the report 
noted: 
"The above background indicates that the attribution of a State to a particular 
area is one in which factors other than geographical considerations play a role. 
It also confirms the absence of any complete indication among Member States 
of the States in each of the areas set out in Article VI". 

That merely confirmed the Syrian view that political factors were instrumental in 
attributing a State to a group, a fact that ought especially to be taken into account in 
the case of the Middle East and South Asia region. One could well ask how Israel 
could become a member of a group of neighbouring countries whose territories it was 
partially occupying. Furthermore, those countries were the target of acts of overt 


GC(40)/OR.2 
page 24 

aggression: Israel had no hesitation, as demonstrated by the massacre at Kana in the 
Lebanon, in attacking civilian targets in violation of international law. 

65. The Syrian Arab Republic therefore asked that consideration of the issue be 
deferred until a just and lasting peace had been established in the region, and Israel 
had acceded to the NPT and placed its nuclear installations under Agency safeguards. 
It should be recalled that the peace talks were at a standstill precisely because the 
Israeli Government had, in violation of international law and practice, gone back on 
undertakings made by previous Israeli Governments. The response of the new Israeli 
Government to a Syrian invitation to resume the talks at the point they had reached 
under the previous Labour Government had been to embark on operations to set up 
new settlements on the Golan heights and other occupied Arab territories. The Syrian 
position, which was supported by the international community, was that there could 
be no solution to the problem without a just and overall peace. 
66. The Syrian Arab Republic, in co-operation with the Agency, had in recent years 
made rapid and tangible progress in the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It had, for 
example, brought an irradiation plant for sterilizing medical articles and industrial 
products into operation in 1995. The plant was currently working for both the public 
and private sectors. Furthermore, a 30 kW miniature neutron source reactor imported 
from the People's Republic of China had recently been installed for research purposes. 
In addition, the Model Project on neonatal hypothyroidism screening had moved into 
its implementation phase, which should help to solve one of the country's most serious 
health problems. With regard to the International Nuclear Information System, the 
Syrian Nuclear Energy Commission was arranging, in collaboration with the Agency, 
for a regional workshop to be held in Damascus in November 1996. 
67. In conclusion, he hoped that the General Conference would adopt resolutions 
that were fair and impartial and avoid the dangerous policy of applying double 
standards. 
68. Mr. ZAIDE (Philippines), welcoming the Republic of Moldova as a new 
member, noted that the increase in the number of Member States could only enhance 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 25 

international co-operation. The Philippines was committed to the principle of the 
sovereign equality of States, a principle that required that all Member States be 
adequately represented on the Board of Governors and thus that objective criteria be 
introduced for the designation of members of the Board. 

69. The General Conference was taking place at a time when important 
developments offered an opportunity for the Agency to attain its development 
objectives. The General Assembly had just adopted the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty by an overwhelming majority, immediately following upon the extension 
of the NPT for an indefinite period and, in October 1996, the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety would enter into force. The international community therefore had reason to 
hope that the atom would be used for peaceful purposes to enhance the quality of life 
of all people. The Philippines was ready to sign the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty in the hope that once it had entered into force, the international community 
would take the next steps towards complete disarmament, including disarmament in 
the nuclear field. 
70. That welcome trend was reflected in various regional initiatives, including the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in South East Asia and Africa. He called 
on nuclear-weapon States to accede to the Protocol to the Treaty on the Southeast Asia 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone and to the Pelindaba Treaty establishing the African 
nuclear-weapon-free zone. It was to be hoped that other nuclear-weapon-free zones 
would be established in other regions. 
71. At the current session of the Conference, Member States should endeavour to 
strengthen the norms and standards to ensure the peaceful and safe use of nuclear 
energy. The Philippines had noted and endorsed the measures to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear, radiation and waste safety outlined in document 
GC(40)/INF/5. In particular, it was encouraged by the progress made in drafting a 
convention on the safety of radioactive waste management and had noted with 
satisfaction the Director General's report on the implementation of measures against 
illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 26 

72. Strengthening the Agency's safeguards system was of crucial importance. His 
delegation therefore welcomed the implementation of additional measures within 
existing legal authority as approved by the General Conference in 1995. The 
Philippines had consistently supported Programme 93+2 and looked forward to early 
completion of the work on the draft protocol to comprehensive safeguards agreements 
providing for new measures to improve the Agency's capability to verify declared 
nuclear material and to detect undeclared nuclear material and activities in States that 
had signed comprehensive safeguards agreements. 
73. His delegation had noted with satisfaction that, in 1995, the Agency had found 
no indication that safeguarded nuclear material had been diverted for nuclear purposes 
or unknown purposes or that safeguarded facilities, equipment or non-nuclear material 
had been misused. It regretted, however, that the Agency was unable to verify the 
correctness and completeness of the initial declaration on nuclear material made by 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea. It called on that country to co-operate fully 
with the Agency in implementing the safeguards agreement. 
74. The Agency's mandate was not confined solely to ensuring that atomic energy 
was used for non-destructive purposes. Its other fundamental mission was to promote 
the use of atomic energy to enhance the quality of life of all people. His delegation 
therefore welcomed the efforts made by the Agency to strengthen technical cooperation, 
as reflected in document GC(40)/5. The identification of areas where 
nuclear technologies could be used most effectively in each country and the 
concentration of assistance on fewer, but better, projects would have a significant 
impact at the national level. 
75. The Philippines was pleased to have participated in the formulation of the 
Country Programme Framework. Nuclear technology alone could not solve all 
problems, but it could play an important role in the search for solutions. It was to be 
hoped that an increasing number of projects would qualify as Model Projects, but when 
the nuclear infrastructure of a country had not yet attained the critical mass, the 
relevant policy should be sufficiently open and flexible to ensure that the necessary 
assistance could be given. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 27 

76. The Philippines wished to express appreciation for the valuable technical 
assistance extended by the Agency in 1995-96 in the form of 29 technical cooperation 
projects, including projects under the RCA, 31 research projects, 8 expert 
missions and 71 fellowships. 
77. In the past year, the Philippines had co-hosted a number of meetings with the 
Agency: in July, the first research co-ordination meeting on the second phase of the 
reference Asian man project, dealing with ingestion and organ content of trace 
elements of importance in radiological protection; in April, the final research coordination 
meeting on treatment technologies for low-and intermediate-level wastes 
generated from nuclear applications; and in January, an expert advisory group 
meeting on national services to establish procedures and guidance on mutual 
assistance. 
78. In 1996, the Philippines was to co-host two more meetings with the Agency: 
a regional training course on quality assurance of dosimetry in radiation therapy, in 
October; and an expert advisory group meeting to report on the status of biological 
dosimetry, including chromosomal aberrations, in November. Those meetings were 
part of the celebrations in the Philippines of the centennial of the discovery of 
radioactivity that would culminate on 10-12 December 1996 in the Philippines Nuclear 
Congress, to be held in co-operation with non-governmental organizations and 
professional societies. The aim of that multisectoral forum of approximately 500 
participants would be to assess national and international factors affecting public 
response to the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. He thanked the Director 
General for his support for the Congress and looked forward to welcoming him in 
Manila. His presence would contribute to the success of the Congress and of its review 
of future applications of nuclear energy for development needs. 
79. He was pleased to announce that the Philippines would contribute its share of 
the target of the TCF for 1997 and would increase its contribution to the RCA. 
80. There were other areas of international co-operation through the Agency in 
which the Philippines was interested. Firstly, the current energy plan of the 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 28 

Philippines covering the period 1996-2005 included nuclear power in the energy mix 
starting in the year 2020. In spite of intensified efforts to tap indigenous energy 
sources, the rapid growth in energy requirements related to the country's accelerating 
development would necessitate greater use of imported energy. The introduction of 
nuclear power would be preceded by a comprehensive information campaign on the 
merits of nuclear energy. That was why the President of the Philippines, Mr. Fidel V. 
Ramos, had created a nuclear power steering committee in May 1995 to study that 
option. The Philippines looked forward to the Agency's continuing support in that 
area. 

81. Secondly, as a developing country, the Philippines welcomed and intended to 
avail itself of the benefits of the policy recently announced by the United States of 
America with regard to accepting and managing spent fuel from foreign research 
reactors. The Philippines wished to explore the possibility of further technical 
assistance from the Agency in such areas as the planning of shipments and the 
training of personnel. 
82. Thirdly, as an island country, the Philippines was seriously affected by the socalled 
"red tide" phenomenon which poisoned marine products and consequently 
threatened the lives and livelihoods of millions of people in the Pacific Ocean. It would 
like the Agency to explore the possibility of carrying out research to determine 
whether nuclear techniques could be used to detect, reduce or eliminate that 
phenomenon. 
83. Fourthly, there had been a number of encouraging developments in food 
irradiation in the ASEAN region. An ASEAN working group on food irradiation had 
been established upon the initiative of the Philippines, which looked forward to 
continuing Agency support for the promotion of food irradiation in the region. 
84. In a related area, there was growing interest within the private sector in the 
Philippines in establishing a facility for the sterilization of medical products. The 
Philippines believed it was necessary to harmonize the regulations in the region to 
ensure the quality and acceptability of irradiated medical products. He thanked 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 29 

Malaysia and Indonesia for their generous assistance to the victims of the fire that had 
taken place in March 1996 in Manila. The dried radiation-sterilized amnions they had 
provided on that occasion had helped to save many lives. That was another fine 
example of close technical co-operation among developing countries in the region. 

85. On 17 May 1996, at the International Conference on the Future of Asia held in 
Tokyo, Japan, the Philippines President, Mr. Fidel V. Ramos, had called on the 
countries of the region to discuss growing concerns related to the promotion of nuclear 
safety in Asia. He had pointed out that the total demand for energy in Asia, and 
particularly in East Asia, would keep on rising, in step with the region's economic 
expansion, and that the region's use of nuclear energy as a source of power was 
expected to outpace that of other regions. That growth would inevitably generate its 
own challenges and opportunities throughout the region and the world in many 
important areas, especially nuclear safety. 
86. ThePhilippinesbelievedthatanASIATOM-typeregionalarrangementcouldhelp 
to promote regional co-operation in the field of nuclear energy, specifically in terms 
of ensuring nuclear safety and addressing radioactive waste concerns. The Philippines 
would consult extensively with its potential partners in the region and gather their 
reactions in due course. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 30 

ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) ADOPTIONOFTHEAGENDAANDALLOCATIONOFITEMSFORINITIALDISCUSSION 
87. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee, which had authorized 
him to report to the Conference, recommended that the agenda for the current session 
should consist of all the items on the provisional agenda set forth in document 
GC(40)/1. 
88. As regarded the allocation of items for initial discussion, the Committee 
recommended that all the items listed in document GC(40)/1 be taken up for discussion 
as indicated in that document. 
89. With regard to the order of items, the Committee recommended that the order 
of items proposed in document GC(40)/1 be maintained, it being understood that, 
depending on the progress of the Conference's work, changes in the order might be 
made after due notice had been given. 
90. All of the 
General Committee's 

recommendations 

regarding 

the 

agenda 

for 

the 
current 

session 

were 

accepted. 

91. The 
agenda 

was 

adopted. 

(b) CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT SESSION 
92. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the 
Conference set Friday, 20 September 1996, as the closing date of the fortieth regular 
session and Monday, 29 September 1997 as the opening date of the forty-first regular 
session, which would be held in Vienna. 
93. The 
Committee's 

recommendations 

were 

accepted. 

REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS (resumed) 

94. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had had before it 
requests from Iraq, Peru and Bolivia that the last sentence in Article XIX.A of the 
Statute be invoked in order that they might be permitted to vote during the current 
session of the General Conference. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 31 

95. The Committee recommended that the requests by Bolivia and Peru should be 
granted on the understanding that such action did not constitute a precedent for the 
future. 
96. The 
Committee's 

recommendation 

with 

respect 

to 

the 

requests 

by 

Bolivia 

and 
Peru 

was 

accepted. 

97. The PRESIDENT said that with regard to the request by Iraq, the 
prevalent view in the Committee was that it should not recommend the restoration of 
Iraq's voting rights. 
98. Mr. FARIS (Iraq) emphasized that until 1990 his country had regularly 
paid its contributions to the Agency's budget; it had subsequently failed to do so only 
because it had been placed in a situation of force majeure. For reasons beyond its 
control, the Iraqi Government had been unable to transfer any funds since 1990. Iraq 
was firmly resolved to fulfil its financial obligations once the conditions currently 
imposed upon it ceased to apply. 
99. Politics in the present instance ought to give way to the legal aspects of the 
issue: no provision of any Security Council resolution had withdrawn Iraq's voting 
rights. In view of the fact that circumstances over which it had no control had 
prevented Iraq from fulfilling its financial obligations, he hoped that the General 
Conference would allow his country to exercise its voting rights in accordance with 
Article XIXof the Statute. It was unfortunate that the General Committee had seen fit 
to make a recommendation guided by political instead of legal considerations. 
100. The PRESIDENT, noting that no other delegation had requested the floor, 
concludedthatthe GeneralConference acceptedthe Committee'srecommendation with 
regard to Iraq. 
101. The 
General Committee's 

recommendation 

with 

respect 

to 

Iraq 

was 

accepted. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (resumed) 

102. Mr. CHAFE (Nigeria) welcomed the Republic of Moldova to the Agency 
and thanked the Secretariat for the excellent documentation before the General 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 32 

Conference, which indicated that the Agency's efficiency had not been compromised, 
in spite of the changes that were taking place. 

103. His delegation had taken note with satisfaction of document GC(40)/8 on the 
Agency's activities in 1995, a year during which Nigeria had continued to receive 
assistance from the Agency, particularly in the area of technical co-operation. The 
Secretariat had adopted a number of positive measures in that area, one of the most 
important steps being the establishment of the Standing Advisory Group on Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation with the responsibility of elaborating a strategic plan for 
the Department of Technical Co-operation. The Group had already held two meetings, 
and he had no doubt that its efforts would enhance technical co-operation. The 
Secretariat had taken other initiatives to promote technical co-operation among 
developing countries: the increased use of experts from those countries, in response 
to requests made by a number of Member States, would certainly improve the delivery 
of approved programmes. 
104. Nigeria had noted with satisfaction the improvements made in management, 
such as the systematic assessment of radiation safety in Member States and the 
planning of follow-up activities. Those measures, together with the careful use of 
overprogramming, had combined to produce the highest rate of programme delivery 
ever. 
105. Nigeria would continue to give its full support to the Agency's efforts to develop 
a strengthened safeguards system, especially in the context of Programme 93+2. The 
Board of Governors had acknowledged that additional information, environmental 
sampling and increased physical access would strengthen the Agency's ability to 
detect undeclared nuclear material and activities. However, his delegation joined 
others in requesting that the measures to be adopted should strike the proper balance 
between the Agency's need for information and access on the one hand, and the need 
ofStates toprotecttheirlegitimate interests and respecttheirconstitutionalobligations, 
on the other. It was also important that those measures should be subject to strict 
rules of confidentiality with regard both to information received and to the entire 
verification process. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 33 

106. The cost of implementation remained a source of concern to a number of 
Member States, including Nigeria. However, the Secretariat had indicated that after 
an initial implementation phase involving a net cost increase, it expected some savings 
to be made fairly soon in line with the objective of cost neutrality. In that regard, his 
delegation welcomed the establishment of the Committee on Strengthening the 
Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards System, which had met 
for the first time in July 1996. His delegation had participated in that meeting and 
would take part in subsequent ones, in the hope that the necessary amendments to 
the draft model protocol could be completed in a timely manner so that the new 
measures could be implemented in a transparent and non-discriminatory manner. 
107. In connection with the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which was to enter into 
force on 24 October 1996, his delegation had noted with satisfaction that over the past 
two years, the Secretariat had been able to organize three open-ended informal 
meetings of future signatories and other interested States to involve them in the work 
being done prior to the Preparatory Meeting of the Contracting Parties. Nigeria had 
been one of the early signatories of the Convention during the thirty-eighth session 
of the General Conference and its Government was considering ratification in order to 
demonstrate its continuing commitment to the Convention's objectives. 
108. The open-ended expert group responsible for elaborating a convention on the 
safety of radioactive waste management had made commendable progress. He hoped 
that the outstanding issues would be resolved in a timely manner so that a draft 
convention could be submitted in early 1997 at the latest. At the present stage, every 
effort should be made to encourage greater participation by developing countries in the 
negotiations, since they would ultimately be bound by the provisions of the future 
convention. 
109. At its thirty-ninth session, the General Conference had welcomed the progress 
made towards the conclusion of a treaty establishing an African nuclear-weapon-free 
zone on the basis of the Declaration on the Denuclearization of Africa, which had been 
adopted by the Summit of Heads of State or Government of the Organization of African 
Unity in July 1964, and of resolution 49/138 adopted by the General Assembly in 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 34 

1994. The signing ceremony of the Pelindaba Treaty had taken place in Cairo on 11 
April 1996 and Nigeria had been among the first countries to sign. It would be 
recalled that 51 Member States of the OAU were already parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and had thereby undertaken to use nuclear 
energy exclusively for peaceful purposes and accepted the application of Agency 
safeguards. The nuclear-weapon States that had promptly signed the Protocol to the 
Pelindaba Treaty were to be commended. Nigeria had great confidence in the 
Agency's ability to verify, through its safeguards system and in accordance with the 
complaints procedure provided for in the Treaty, compliance by the States Parties with 
their commitment to use nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful purposes. 

110. In addition to ensuring the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy, the 
Pelindaba Treaty committed the Parties to promote individually and collectively the use 
of nuclear science and technology for economic and social development. The Parties 
were encouraged to make use of the Agency's programme of assistance and to 
strengthen co-operation under AFRA. 
111. NigeriawaslookingforwardtotakingoverthechairmanshipofAFRAattheend 
of the current session of the Conference. It had already hosted the seventh technical 
working group meeting held at Zaria in April 1996. He thanked the Secretariat for its 
assistance, which had made a major contribution to the successful outcome of the 
meeting. He also wished to express appreciation to South Africa for the vision and 
commitment it had brought to the activities of AFRA in the past year: under its 
chairmanship, and through constant evaluation of projects, AFRA had been managed 
in a business-like manner. Finally, he noted that the budget for AFRAprogrammes for 
1997 was $4 million, of which the Agency was to provide some $2.5 million, leaving 
a shortfall of $1.5 million. He urged Member States that were in a position to do so 
to assist in ensuring the implementation of AFRA programmes, which were now 
concentrated in the areas of radiation protection and safety, clinical radiotherapy, 
agricultural production and various radiation applications. 
112. Illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources remained a 
cause of great concern. The Agency was playing a major role in dealing with that 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 35 

issue, in co-operation with Member States. A programme had been included in the 
Agency's programme and budget for 1997, with a Regular Budget allocation of $560 
000 and extrabudgetary contributions expected to amount to $1.2 million. His 
delegation had noted that the establishment of a database, assistance to Member 
States in improving physical protection and control of nuclear material, border control 
measures and supporting the adoption by States of the Basic Safety Standards 
pertaining to illicit trafficking were all projected under that programme. 

113. The issue of the amendment of Article VI of the Statute had been before both 
the Board of Governors and the General Conference for nearly two decades. In its 
most recent resolution on the subject, adopted in 1995, the General Conference had, 
inter alia, requested the Board of Governors to continue consultations with Member 
States through the open-ended consultative group and to submit recommendations on 
proposed amendments of Article VI for approval by the General Conference at its 
fortieth regular session. It was regrettable that the General Conference would not have 
before it the text of an agreed amendment, but a number of specific proposals worthy 
of consideration had nevertheless been put forward. He was convinced that the time 
had come to muster the necessary courage and political will to enable Article VI to be 
amended, so as to address the obvious under-representation of the African region, as 
well as of the Middle East and South Asia, on the Board. 
114. The Director General had provided useful information on the staffing of the 
Agency's Secretariat. His efforts to rectify the poor representation of developing 
countries, and especially of women from developing countries, in the Agency's 
Secretariat were to be commended. In that respect, his delegation had taken note of 
a number of measures that had been adopted to achieve the objectives set by 
resolutions GC(39)/RES/19 and GC(39)/RES/20 adopted by the General Conference in 
1995. With those and other initiatives, it would be possible to bring about a 
substantial increase in the number of staff recruited from developing countries, 
especially in the Professional and higher categories, which would further improve the 
excellent work of the Agency. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 36 

115. The project and supply agreement between the Agency and the Governments 
of Nigeria and the People's Republic of China for the supply of a miniature neutron 
source reactor, approved by the Board of Governors in March 1996, had entered into 
force on 29 August 1996. Nigeria was very grateful to the Director General and the 
Secretariat, particularly the Department of Technical Co-operation and the Legal 
Division, for their vital roles in the preparation of both the agreement and the 
commercial contract. There was no doubt that the Agency would continue to offer the 
necessary assistance for that important project, and Nigeria, for its part, would 
endeavour to meet all its obligations in that regard. 
116. Nigeria was aware of the Agency's growing responsibilities, particularly in the 
areas of safeguards and promotional activities. It hoped that all Member States would 
meet their financial obligations, without which the programmes approved by the 
General Conference could not be implemented. For its part, the Nigerian Government 
was prepared to pay its share of the target for the TCF for 1997. 
117. Mr. VILLACÍS (Ecuador) thanked the Secretariat for its work to promote 
peace, which was one of mankind's most precious commodities, and said that the 
efforts made by the Agency to promote the elaboration and negotiation of various 
safeguards agreements and to prevent nuclear technology from being diverted for 
purposes other than peaceful ones were of decisive importance. 
118. Thanks to the Agency's support, nuclear technology was being used every day 
in Ecuador for treating the sick, diagnosing diseases, sterilizing products, detecting 
environmental pollutants, seeking to solve various agricultural problems and resolving 
the hydrological problems that were becoming more and more frequent. He thanked 
the Agency and donor countries that had enabled his country to place nuclear 
technology at the service of the development and well-being of the population. 
119. Ecuador wished to make the most rational and cost-effective use possible of the 
significant water resources required to meet the growing needs of its numerous 
citizens living in the country without electricity and potable water. Ecuador placed 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 37 

great hopes in the progress made by the Agency regarding the cost-effective 
production of potable water and would support any activities carried out in that field. 

120. With the Agency's assistance, the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission had 
concluded agreements with the educational and manufacturing sectors to promote the 
symbiosis that seemed necessary to ensure balanced and sustained development. In 
that connection, the authorities were to establish, together with the Technical 
University of Machala, an institute for research on bananas that would be responsible 
forcreating conditions favourable tothe optimum use offertilizers, therebycontributing 
toenvironmentalconservation, and would investigate the appropriate use offertigation 
and ways of optimizing root activity of banana plants. The University would also 
measure the presence of heavy metals in shrimp farms as well as the presence of 
pesticides using the facilities of the ecotoxological laboratory of the Ecuadorian Atomic 
Energy Commission. An agreement would be reached with the Army Higher 
Polytechnical School to establish a centre for environmental research, for which a 
"clean" laboratory that would make it possible to determine very small concentrations 
was being built. Finally, an agreement had been made with PETROECUADOR to 
quantify heavy metals in the slurries and residues from oil wells and in formation 
waters, as well as the presence of total hydrocarbons and polycyclic aromatic 
hydrocarbons. 
121. Ecuador fully supported the activities carried out by ARCALat the regional and 
subregionallevels. Theprogrammehadestablishedtiesoffriendshipandco-operation 
among countries in the region that had similar interests and problems. The Agency's 
support contributed to integration and harmony in a region where a number of 
countries were becoming true partners for development. 
122. Ecuador had noted with satisfaction the adoption by the General Assembly of 
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. That decision, supported by an 
overwhelming majority of States, showed that it was possible to strengthen peace and 
prepare the way for progress for future generations. He appealed to all countries to 
ratify the Treaty so that it could enter into force as soon as possible. He welcomed the 
fact that more and more countries the world over were concluding safeguards 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 38 

agreements with the Agency, thereby subjecting themselves to effective controls to 
ensure that nuclear energy was used properly. Ecuador welcomed in particular the 
recent conclusion of a safeguards agreement with Chile and the proposed conclusion 
of a similar agreement with the Czech Republic. 

123. As the pilot Internet access plan was coming to an end, the Permanent Mission 
of Ecuador in Vienna, which had benefited from it, thanked the Secretariat for that 
initiative that had had important multiplier effects and which, owing to the assistance 
provided throughout the project, had given access to the Agency's vast database. Now 
that the project was coming to an end, the beneficiaries had acquired the necessary 
know -how to continue it on their own. 

GC(40)/OR.2 
page 39 

124. Ecuador was closely following the Agency's activities and would do everything 
possible to help it fulfil its statutory obligations. As long as it was strengthened and 
supported by all Member States, the Agency would be capable of assisting them in 
providing for an easier, safer and more prosperous life for their populations and future 
generations. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

6.10 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
November 1996 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 


FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THIRD PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 17 September 1996, at 10.10 a.m. 
President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 
Later: Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon) 
Later: Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) 
Item of the 
agenda* 
CONTENTS 
Paragraphs 
7 General debate and annual report for 1995 
(continued) 1 -143 
Statements by the delegates and representatives of the 
following States and organizations: 
United States of America 
Bulgaria 
India 
Morocco 
Ukraine 
United Kingdom 
Yemen 
Viet Nam 
Thailand 
Belgium 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 
1 -34 
35 -46 
47 -62 
63 -74 
75 -88 
89 -96 
97 -102 
103 -107 
108 -115 
116 -130 
131 -138 
139 -143 

[*] GC(40)/22. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96-03347 (XXIII) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.3 
page 2 
Abbreviations used in this record 
Agreed Framework Agreed Framework between the United States of America and 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Canberra 
Commission Canberra Commission on the Elimination of Nuclear Weapons 
CTBT Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty 
CTBTO Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization 
DOE United States Department of Energy 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
EBRD European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
G-7 Group of Seven 
MOX Mixed oxide 
NATO North Atlantic Treaty Organization 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NPT Review and 
E x t e n s i o n C o n f e r e n c e 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Nuclear Safety 
Convention Convention on Nuclear Safety 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OPANAL Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
Pelindaba Treaty African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 
PHWR Pressurized heavy water reactor 
Rarotonga Treaty South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
START Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive 
Arms 
TCF Technical Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
TUIWE Trade Unions International of Workers in Energy 
Vienna Convention Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
(May 1963) 
WANO World Association of Nuclear Operators 
World Bank International Bank for Reconstruction and Development 


GC(40)/OR.3 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (continued) 

1. Ms. O'LEARY (United States of America) began by reading out the 
following message from the President of the United States of America to the General 

Conference: 

"During its nearly 40-year history, the IAEA has played a critical role in the 
international community's efforts to stop the spread of nuclear weapons and to 
promote the safe and peaceful use of nuclear technology. The Agency has 
tremendous responsibilities in maintaining peace and security throughout the 
world and itsperformance hasearned itthe confidence ofIAEAMemberStates. 

"But as the world changes in the wake of the Cold War and our nuclear 
challenges are transformed, we must ensure that the IAEA remains prepared 
and ready to meet its new responsibilities. Non-proliferation is a fundamental 
pillar of the national security and foreign policy of the United States. More than 
ever before, the international community understands how directly nuclear 
proliferation threatens worldwide stability. The Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) 
represents the cornerstone ofthe internationalnon-proliferation regime, and we 
must ensure compliance with the Treaty. That is why we must strengthen the 
Agency's ability to carry out its mandate and provide it with the necessary 
authority and resources to combat the proliferation of nuclear weapons, 
including the Agency's capability to detect undeclared nuclear activities. 

"The United States firmly supports those measures proposed by the Secretariat 
in Programme 93+2. The United States stands ready to apply the new 
safeguards as fully as possible in our country consistent with our obligations 
under the NPT. I urge all Member States to join the United States in an early 
consensus on strengthening safeguards as a matter of common importance. 

"The indefinite extension of the NPT last year secured the framework of the 
international non-proliferation effort for all future generations. Now we must 
provide additional tools to fight the spread of nuclear weapons. One of the 
most important steps that can be taken this year is the signature of the 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). This agreement will supplement the 
NPT as a primary bulwark against nuclear proliferation. I urge all nations to 
sign the CTBT. 

"Diminishing the threat of proliferation will help to facilitate the safe and 
productive use of nuclear equipment and materials. Efforts to ensure effective 
technical co-operation among nations have established the IAEA as a partner 
in concrete economic and social development across the globe. In setting 
standards for the secure use of nuclear technology in medicine, energy, 
agriculture, and other areas of human benefit, the IAEA is working to prevent 


GC(40)/OR.3 
page 4 

the use of nuclear technology for war by showing how atomic energy can be 
used successfully for peace. 

"The success of the IAEA depends on close co-operation among its Members. 
With the fortieth session of the General Conference, I am confident that we will 
continue to expand global collaboration in the peaceful use of nuclear energy 
and technology in the context of a strong non-proliferation regime. On behalf 
of the people of the United States, I extend to you my best wishes for a 
productive and successful Conference." 

2. When President Clinton had come to office, the international community had 
been facing the difficult challenge of adjusting to the realities of a world without Cold 
War. With the assistance of the United States' international partners, he had launched 
a bold and comprehensive strategy to ensure nuclear peace in the post-Cold War era. 
That strategy focused on three main issues: improving nuclear safety, overcoming 
new nuclear security dangers, and demonstrating the continued value of nuclear 
energy and technology for human development. 

3. The Agency had a key role to play in that strategy by promoting nuclear safety, 
expanding the international use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes, and 
preventing nuclear proliferation. The unflagging commitment and vision of the 
Agency, together with its strong leadership, were a key factor in realizing the 
possibilities of the post-Cold War world. One decisive element was the commitment 
to strengthen IAEA safeguards and ensure that the IAEA had the ability and authority 
to verify safeguards obligations under the NPT. The proposals contained in Programme 
93+2 should satisfactorily improve the Agency's capabilities in that regard. 
4. In 1995, the signatory States of the NPT had accomplished one of the most 
significant security achievements of the new era: the indefinite extension of the NPT. 
Coming at a critical time in world history -the fiftieth anniversary of the nuclear age that 
event had been a dramatic triumph for world peace and security. At present, the 
international community faced an equally important challenge in the fight to preserve 
global peace and security. After two and a half years of negotiations, the 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty had been concluded. The resolution on the CTBT had 
been passed by the United Nations with a resounding majority and the Treaty would 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 5 

be opened for signature on 24 September 1996. She encouraged all nations to sign 
it. 

5. At the NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995, the nuclear-weapon 
States had committed themselves to moving towards irreversible nuclear disarmament. 
One major step in that direction had been taken during the current year at the Moscow 
Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security. At that meeting, nuclear-weapon States and 
non-nuclear-weapon States had discussed openly how to control and dispose of fissile 
material which had been produced for weapons and was no longer needed. The chief 
outcome of the meeting was an agreement to place excess fissile material under 
international safeguards as soon as was practicable. A dialogue on that issue had 
started between the United States, Russia and the IAEAand would continue during the 
week of the General Conference. The parties had also agreed to take action during 
1996 on the safe management and permanent disposal of excess weapons-usable 
nuclear material. Russia and the United States had already diluted over 10 tons of 
highly enriched uranium produced for weapons, making it no longer suitable for 
nuclear explosives. 
6. Those achievements were cause for celebration, but it was essential to maintain 
momentum. That meant meeting commitments to reduce nuclear weapons globally, 
signing the CTBT during the current year, increasing co-operation on the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy, and expanding support for effective nuclear safeguards. 
7. In order to meet the difficult challenges of the post-Cold War era, use of human 
resources had to be maximized. The United States remained committed to enhancing 
the role of women in key managerial and decision-making positions at the IAEA and 
would continue to do everything within its power to increase the number of applicants 
for such posts by supporting women working in technical fields. She welcomed the 
modest progress the Agency had made in that regard during the preceding year. At 
present, women comprised 18% of the workforce in Professional posts at the Agency. 
Female representation in technical and scientific posts remained low at only 8.9%, and 
only 8% of the total number of well-qualified applicants for such positions were 
women. She urged Member States to put forward suitably qualified female applicants 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 6 

for vacancies. At the current rate of progress, reaching the goal of 50% representation 
of women could take till the year 2029. It was important to increase the pace. Over 
the past two years, the United States had provided two experts to the Agency to advise 
on and assist with the implementation of an action plan for improving the status and 
representation of women in the Secretariat. One of the recommendations made was 
the creation of the Learning Resource Centre which would assist all Agency staff, but 
in particular women, to assess their career potential and options. Its primary roles 
were to improve the recruiting and promotion of women. The United States would be 
making a financial contribution to the Learning Resource Centre to help the IAEA 
establish that new tool, was committed to expanding its work with the Agency in that 
important area, and would be keeping track of the progress made. 

8. Expanding the peaceful uses of atomic energy was an important means of 
improving the lives of the world population. Two successful projects illustrated the 
United States' commitment to the expansion of technical co-operation. Firstly, it had 
provided assistance with medical physics training in Mexico where there had been a 
vital need to train, and increase the number of specialized physicists in such areas as 
radiotherapy, diagnostic radiology and nuclear medicine. The project in question had 
established a training programme and facilities to meet current and future needs 
through a curriculum leading to a master's degree in medical physics. In 1996, the 
first graduate class of 10 medical physicists had received degrees. Medical physicists 
from other Latin American countries would be trained in Mexico and the project was 
an excellent model for similar national programmes. Secondly, it had provided support, 
in concert with the IAEA and other donors, for the eradication of the tsetse fly on 
Zanzibar island through the financing of experts and equipment. Working closely with 
the Governments of Tanzania and Zanzibar, the Agency had utilized a unique method 
of applying radiation to sterilize the insect. While conventional techniques had been 
tried, none had had the long-lasting success of the sterile insect technique. 
9. Another project which the United States was particularly pleased with was 
being carried out in Tunisia. For a modest amount of money, a network had been 
established which screened every new-born child for neonatal hypothyroidism via 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 7 

radioimmunoassay. Children found to be suffering from the condition would be treated 
immediately and should grow up to be normal and healthy. If hypothyroidism 
remained undetected, it could lead to varying degrees of mental retardation. One in 
a thousand new-born children in Tunisia had the condition. That project was a fine 
example of how the Agency's technical co-operation programmes directly affected 
people's lives. 

10. The increasing importance and effectiveness of the Agency's technical cooperation 
programmes was due at least in part to the establishment of the Model 
Project concept which attempted to match technical co-operation activities closely to 
the social and economic needs of recipient countries. The Department of Technical Co-
operation was moving towards a situation where the discipline of model projects 
would be applied to all technical co-operation activities, and the evaluation 
mechanisms for such projects would be incorporated from the outset of planning. The 
additional effort on pre-project planning and improved project management would 
most certainly prove to be a worthwhile investment. The United States was providing 
a cost-free expert to the Department of Technical Co-operation to assist with the 
changes. 
11. The most obvious use of nuclear power in everyday life was for the generation 
of electricity. Nuclear power remained a vital and viable energy resource. To realize 
its full potential, existing and future nuclear power plants had to be as safe as possible. 
While the primary responsibility for nuclear safety rested with the operators of power 
reactors, the Agency had helped demonstrate that nuclear safety was inherently an 
international issue. Just as the consequences of nuclear accidents transcended 
borders, so did the ability to prevent them. 
12. Safe nuclear power generation had always benefited from international 
collaboration. Nuclear technology companies from Japan, Germany, France, Russia, the 
Republic of Korea, the United Kingdom and other countries were collaborating with the 
United States on the design of new, safer, more efficient, advanced light-water 
reactors. United States' reactor designs had been adopted by many nations, and 
Russian technology for reactor vessel annealing was being demonstrated in a 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 8 

collaborative programme in France and South Africa. In Russia and Ukraine, advanced 
nuclear training centres used methodologies developed in the United States and 
elsewhere and, at the Ignalina nuclear power plant in Lithuania and the Leningrad 
nuclear power plant in Russia, probabilistic risk assessments were being conducted by 
teams of safety experts from several countries. The information gained from such 
exercises could be used to determine what the safest option was for the reactor's 
future and to improve safety at other reactors. 

13. As the world's energy requirements grew, so did the opportunities and the need 
for international co-operation, and nuclear power remained an important option. Of 
the 34 countries currently operating nuclear power plants, 20 had a total of 98 nuclear 
units at various stages of construction. Much of the interest in nuclear energy in the 
intermediate term was in countries with high-growth economies which were 
concerned over the same problems of energy supply and energy independence which 
had led the United States to build its current fleet of plants. In Asia alone, 37 new 
nuclear power plants with a combined capacity of nearly 35 GW(e) were currently 
under construction. The United States shared with those countries an important 
interest in maintaining diversity of energy supply. Though conventional energy 
reserves remained significant, the cost of obtaining and delivering those energy 
sources was likely to increase over time. In addition, diversity helped to ensure 
continuity of power when unforeseen problems occurred in one or more fuel sources. 
Finally, nuclear energy could help mitigate the environmental impact of burning fossil 
fuels on an industrial scale. 
14. The development of advanced reactor designs and safety systems was too 
expensive for countries to achieve on their own. It was therefore important to enhance 
international collaboration and research on nuclear technology and safety. The 
Agency, the World Association of Nuclear Operators, the Nuclear Energy Agency of the 
OECD, and nuclear safety centres in various countries provided opportunities for coordinated 
research and information exchange which would be significantly more costly 
ifdonebyindividualcountries. TheIAEAandtheNuclearEnergyAgencyoftheOECD 
operated the Incident Reporting System which disseminated operating experience. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 9 

The Agency's international peer review programme, international regulatory review 
teams, radiation protection advisory service, and severe accident research provided 
opportunities for expertise to be applied where it was most needed. Programmes of 
that type should continue to develop and grow, and all countries which operated 
nuclear power plants or were interested in nuclear power should be encouraged to 
take part. 

15. Several events during the past year had given additional impetus to 
international co-operation on nuclear safety. At the Moscow Summit on Nuclear Safety 
and Security, the major industrialized nations had reaffirmed their commitment to 
enhance nuclear safety worldwide. Those nations had also joined with the 
Government ofUkraine in a Memorandum ofUnderstanding in support ofthe shutdown 
of the Chernobyl nuclear power plant by the year 2000. Moreover, 1996 had 
witnessed the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident and the Agency had 
brought together leading nuclear safety experts to update the world's understanding 
of that tragic event. 
16. Thanks to the IAEA's efforts, the legal framework for international commitments 
to safety was also improving. The Nuclear Safety Convention would be entering into 
force on 24 October 1996. For the first time, countries would have a mechanism for 
ensuring that they and their neighbours adhered to an internationally recognized set 
of safety principles. An international liability regime was also being developed. The 
concept of such a regime had been endorsed at the Moscow Summit on Nuclear Safety 
and Security in April, and the draft supplementary funding convention on nuclear 
liability might be ready for a diplomatic conference before the next session of the 
General Conference. Work was also continuing on a convention on the safe 
managementofradioactive waste which would setforth the safetyrequirements which 
member countries would be obliged to implement in national legislation, and would 
provide for periodic peer review to determine how well the implementation of those 
requirements was proceeding. She hoped that that convention would be open for 
signature at the next General Conference. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 10 

17. A similar and equally dramatic change in international collaboration was 
occurring in the nuclear security arena. The new conditions of the post-Cold War era 
had made possible the growth of international support for the long-sought ban on 
nuclear tests and the creation of a consensus on the need to limit the production and 
use of fissile material. Spearheaded by the indefinite extension of the NPT, great 
strides had been made in that area in the past year. 
18. The world community had been trying to institute a comprehensive ban on 
nuclear tests for over four decades. Following two and a half years of intensive 
negotiations, the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty would now soon be open for 
signature. That important milestone could not have been reached without the 
assistance and guidance of many nations. In an effort to make the CTBT a reality, the 
United States had taken many ground-breaking steps, including publishing for the first 
time a compilation of all the nuclear tests the United States had conducted. The 
Government of Russia had also recently released a compendium of its nuclear weapon 
tests and peaceful explosions. 
19. Another important new arms control and disarmament measure which was 
under consideration was the fissile material cut-off treaty. That treaty was designed 
to limit the further unsafeguarded production of fissile material for use in nuclear 
weapons or other explosive devices and would permanently freeze the quantitative 
growth of nuclear stockpiles worldwide. It would constitute a major victory in the 
international community's campaign to promote nuclear non-proliferation and 
disarmament, and would attest to the nuclear-weapon States' serious commitment to 
the disarmament obligations contained in Article VI of the NPT. However, serious 
diplomatic challenges lay ahead. Although the United Nations General Assembly had 
unanimously passed a resolution in 1993 calling for the negotiation of a cut-off treaty, 
it was not until March 1995 that an agreement on a mandate had been adopted by 
the Conference on Disarmament. She urged all Member States to join the United States 
in supporting the prompt initiation of negotiations based on the mandate agreed upon 
in March 1995. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 11 

20. Though it was vital to end the production of fissile material for weapons, IAEA 
safeguards also had to be strengthened in order to ensure that the Agency had the 
ability and authority to verify NPT safeguards obligations. She commended the efforts 
of the Agency and the co-operation of Member States in helping to bring to fruition a 
programme of enhanced safeguards. The proposals contained in Programme 93+2 
should substantially improve the Agency's ability to detect undeclared nuclear 
activities. 
21. The programme of enhanced safeguards would present new and difficult 
challenges. In particular, the need to strengthen the Agency's capabilities to detect 
undeclared activities was causing concern. While important progress had been made 
with the implementation ofmeasures underexisting authorities, such as environmental 
sampling, the job had to be finished. In October 1996, a committee of the Board of 
Governors would reconvene to negotiate a model protocol which would provide the 
Agency with the new authority it required. She urged all States to support those 
efforts and expressed the hope that a consensus text could be presented to the Board 
in December. The United States was ready to implement the agreed new measures 
in the United States as soon as possible, to the extent that they were consistent with 
its obligations under its safeguards agreement with the Agency. 
22. The United States and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea continued to 
work together to implement the provisions of the Agreed Framework. Over the past 
year, technical experts from the United States and the DPRK had begun placing the 
DPRK's spent fuel rods in canisters. Safeguards seals were being placed on those 
canisters by Agency safeguards personnel. The technical experts from both the United 
States and the DPRK had developed a good working relationship. They had also 
worked in concert with the Agency personnel at Nyongbyon to complete the 
safeguarding arrangements for the fuel. Approximately 35% of the fuel rods had been 
placed in secure storage at the Nyongbyon spent fuel basin so far. The United States 
commended the professional job of the IAEA and the co-operation of the DPRK in 
meeting the agreed provisions. However, important work still remained to be done. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 12 

23. Another major challenge of the new nuclear agenda was to ensure that the 
hundreds of tons of fissile material which had accumulated as a result of the nuclear 
competition between the superpowers remained as safe and secure as possible. To 
that end, the United States, in collaboration with its partners in Russia, the Newly 
Independent States and the Baltic States, had embarked on a comprehensive effort to 
ensure the highest level of fissile material security. That effort had become one of the 
most significant success stories of the post-Cold War period. The collaborative efforts 
had expanded to cover over 40 locations. The most significant growth in collaboration 
had been in Russia. Over the past year, Presidents Clinton and Yeltsin and Vice-
President Gore and Prime Minister Chernomyrdin had committed themselves to making 
that effort a priority for both Governments. Good momentum had been achieved and 
improvements in security were being implemented rapidly. Training of safeguards 
specialists, inspectors and regulatory officials was currently under way. For instance, 
significant progress had been made with the implementation of the DOE agreement 
with the Russian Federal Nuclear and Radiation Safety Authority, including cooperation 
on a far-reaching roster ofprojects such as training ofRussian regulators and 
inspectors, development of regulatory documents, and collaboration on the 
development of the Russian national nuclear material accounting and control system. 
Significant material protection, control and accounting upgrades had been carried out 
at numerous civil facilities, and the Institute of Physics and Power Engineering at 
Obninsk had begun the task of consolidating over 80% of their weapons-usable 
nuclear material in a specially secured area. Nuclear material portal monitoring 
devices had been installed and operationalized at high-throughput facilities. Co-
operation between the United States and Russia had expanded to include security 
improvements for fresh nuclear fuel owned by the Russian Navy. In addition, 
agreement had been reached with the Russian Government to co-operate on the 
provision of nuclear material security upgrades to the fissile material transportation 
system. 

24. Great strides had also been made in the other Newly Independent States. 
Shortly after the current session of the General Conference, comprehensive nuclear 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 13 

material protection, control and accounting upgrades would be completed at the 
Tashkent Institute of Nuclear Physics in Uzbekistan. Soon thereafter, a similar project 
would be completed at the Minsk Institute of Nuclear Power Engineering in Belarus. 
Under Project Sapphire, the United States had received approximately 600 kilograms 
of highly enriched uranium from the Republic of Kazakstan. The United States had 
pledged that that material would be placed under Agency safeguards and had now 
fulfilled that pledge. The Agency had recently conducted its initial inspection of the 
Sapphire material at a commercial facility in Lynchburg, Virginia. However, it was in 
the Baltic States that the co-operative programme on safeguards had had its first 
complete success: in March 1996, an integrated system of material protection, control 
and accounting had been installed at the Salispals Institute of Physics in Latvia. 

25. As collaborative safeguards work expanded, it was important to look constantly 
for technologically advanced and less expensive ways of accomplishing goals. At the 
last General Conference, the United States had drawn attention to remote monitoring 
technology which had been developed in the United States and which could be used 
to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of nuclear material security. The United 
States and the Agency had designed, installed and tested a remote monitoring system 
at the Oak Ridge highly enriched uranium storage vault. System improvements were 
being made to meet Agency requirements and joint testing of the improved system 
was scheduled to continue into early 1997. The United States' remote monitoring 
work had expanded and currently included international partners from 14 Member 
States and international organizations. The United States and Russia were 
collaborating on the incorporation of Russian technologies into the system, and were 
investigating the use of remote monitoring systems for national security and bilateral 
nuclear weapons disarmament transparency purposes. In addition, the Agency had 
begun to develop an approach for the use of remote monitoring, and planned to begin 
using the technology for safeguards in 1997. 
26. One of the most far-reaching and vital elements of the new nuclear security 
agenda was the need to ensure the transparency and irreversibility of the nuclear 
disarmament process. In the past year, the United States had taken a major step 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 14 

towards meeting its commitment to reduce the nuclear threat by ratifying the START 
IIagreement. TheSTARTIandIIagreementswouldreduceUnitedStates'andRussian 
strategic warhead stockpiles by about 70% from their Cold War peaks. However, it 
was important to ensure that excess nuclear material removed from dismantled 
weapons remained unavailable for military use. The negotiations between the United 
States and Russia on the transparency and irreversibility of the nuclear weapons 
reduction process provided an essential forum for experts from both countries to 
discuss bilateral limitations on the reuse of nuclear material from dismantled nuclear 
weapons, confidence-buildingarrangements, and ways ofpromoting transparencyand 
information sharing. Nuclear disarmament had also been given a boost by the signing 
of the Protocols for the South Pacific and African nuclear-weapon-free zones. The 
United States was proud to be a signatory to both of those milestone treaties. 

27. One key element in the measures to ensure transparency and irreversibility was 
the down-blending of 500 metric tons of Russian highly enriched uranium and its sale 
to the United States as reactor fuel for peaceful purposes. In 1995, 10 shipments of 
uranium had arrived in the United States from the Russian down-blending facilities, 
the highly enriched uranium equivalent of approximately 240 nuclear weapons. In 
1996, the United States Enrichment Corporation anticipated receiving the low-enriched 
uranium produced from at least 12 more metric tons of highly enriched uranium, 
approximately the amount of material required for 480 bombs. The United States and 
Russia had also agreed to implement a series of transparency measures at uranium 
processing facilities in both countries in order to bolster confidence that the terms of 
the agreement and common non-proliferation goals were being met. 
28. At last year's General Conference, the Director General had pointed out that the 
replacement of high-enriched uranium fuel by low-enriched fuel in research reactors 
could reduce the risk of proliferation. Over the past year, the United States had 
undertaken a number of bold steps to achieve that goal. For instance, it had decided 
to accept spent foreign research reactor fuel containing enriched uranium of United 
States origin. Over the coming 13 years, the United States would be accepting up to 
20 tons of spent research reactor fuel from 41 countries. It was taking that step in 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 15 

order to reduce the danger of nuclear proliferation and promote international efforts 
to convert research reactors around the globe from the use of highly enriched uranium 
fuel to the use of low-enriched uranium. Apart from the benefits for non-proliferation, 
that programme should also help reduce the physical security burdens associated with 
the use ofresearch reactors employing highlyenriched uranium, without sacrificing the 
benefits of nuclear research and isotope production. The United States had also 
resumed the development of advanced, high-density, low-enriched uranium fuels, and 
had concluded a collaboration agreement with Russia on the conversion of its research 
reactors. It also hoped to integrate that programme into its co-operative efforts with 
other nations operating research reactors using highly enriched uranium fuel. 

29. The growing stockpiles of plutonium, both civil and military, also posed a 
potential threat to global security. Although the conclusion of a fissile material cut-off 
treaty would take time, important steps could be taken now in support of that treaty's 
objectives. The United States and Russia were engaged in discussions with a view to 
converting Russia's three remaining production reactors so that the output ofweaponsgrade 
plutonium in that country could be ended. Although certain difficult issues 
remained, it should be possible to solve them without sacrificing Russia's commitment 
to provide heat and electricity to the citizens of Tomsk and Krasnoyarsk, nor its 
commitment to end the production of weapons-grade plutonium by the end of the 
decade. The plutonium-using nations of the world had been meeting in Vienna to 
develop guidelines for the international management of plutonium. Despite the 
disparate interests of the nine nations involved, final agreement on a set of guidelines 
covering storage, transportation and protection was within view. Those modest first 
steps would lay the groundwork not only for increased international openness on the 
subject of plutonium management, but also for bolder actions in the future. In addition. 
the forthcoming IAEA Symposium on "Nuclear Fuel Cycle and Reactor Strategies: 
Adjusting to New Realities" would provide a forum to discuss strategies for the 
development of nuclear power worldwide in ways that minimized the risk of nuclear 
proliferation. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 16 

30. As part of a unilateral initiative, the United States had completed a 
comprehensive plan for the international inspection of fissile material which had been 
declared excess to its national defence needs. Under that plan, the United States 
would submit 26 metric tons of excess fissile material to IAEA inspection during the 
forthcoming three years, in addition to the 12 metric tons of excess highly enriched 
uranium and plutonium which had already been placed under Agency safeguards at 
DOE facilities. That decision aimed at demonstrating the United States' commitment 
to irreversible disarmament and openness in its nuclear programmes, and at promoting 
international controls on fissile material and the strengthening of Agency safeguards. 
The United States, Russia and the Agency had also committed themselves to holding 
an unprecedented trilateral discussion on the application of international safeguards 
to excess fissile material. That discussion, which was to be held later on the same 
day, should create a sound foundation for further progress. 
31. Despite the progress which had been made, certain financial, technical and 
classification issues still needed to be addressed. Much of the United States' excess 
material was in classified forms and one key question was how to ensure that 
sensitive weapons information was not disclosed as a result ofIAEAinspections. There 
was also the problem of ensuring that excess material had been irreversibly removed 
from national security uses and, of course, the difficulty of resource constraints. 
Nevertheless, working together with Russia and the IAEA, the United States would 
continue to make good its commitment to submit fissile materials no longer needed for 
defence purposes to IAEA inspection as soon as was practicable. 
32. However, safeguarding excess material from military programmes was just the 
first step in the important process of irreversible disarmament. The material also had 
to be permanently disposed of. At the Moscow Summit, a number significant 
commitments had been made in that area and the next steps would be discussed at 
the conference to be held in Paris in October 1996. The United States had decided to 
blend down surplus highly enriched uranium to low-enriched uranium for peaceful use 
as commercial reactor fuel. Any material which could not be used economically for this 
purpose would be blended down and disposed of as low-level waste. In addition, the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 17 

United States had narrowed its range of options for the disposal of excess plutonium 
down to three: use in reactors, immobilization, and geological disposal. It expected 
to take a decision as to which technologies would be implemented before the end of 
the year. Joint technical studies and plans for small-scale tests and demonstrations 
of disposal technologies had recently been completed by the United States and Russia. 
That work was vital to building trust and co-operation between those two countries, 
fulfilling the intent of the NPT, and reducing the global nuclear threat from excess 
stockpiles of weapons-usable fissile material. 

33. Summing up the progress of the past year, she noted that, in the field of nuclear 
and technical co-operation, the agreement between the United States and Russia on 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy and a similar agreement with EURATOM had been 
renewed; an agreement with Bulgaria had entered into force and three additional 
agreements had been signed with Argentina, South Africa and Brazil; funding had 
been provided for 20 technical co-operation projects around the world ranging in 
subject matter from the improvement of nuclear medicine services to evaluation of 
water resources monitoring, nuclear techniques for environmental control and tsetse 
fly eradication; and the sister laboratory programme had been expanded to Argentina, 
Kenya, Costa Rica, Thailand and Ghana in addition to the arrangements already in 
place with Mexico, Peru, Malaysia, Morocco and Egypt. In the field of nuclear safety, 
the emergency operating procedures at the Novovoronezh nuclear power plant in 
Russia had been formally adopted; the International Chernobyl Centre for Nuclear 
Safety, Radioactive Waste Management and Radioecology had been established; 
reactor vessel annealing had been demonstrated at Marble Hill in the United States 
with international participation; and five additional training courses for nuclear power 
plant operators had been completed in Russia and Ukraine. In the field of nuclear 
security, the STARTIITreatyhadbeen ratifiedin the UnitedStates;the Protocolstothe 
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free-Zone 
Treaty had been signed; fissile material safeguards had been improved in co-operation 
with Russia, the Newly Independent States and the Baltic States; the Agreed 
Framework between the United States and the DPRK had been implemented and the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 18 

security of spent fuel in the DPRK improved; the quantities of United States excess 
fissile materialunderIAEAsafeguardshadbeen increased;discussionsofexcessfissile 
material safeguards had been initiated with Russia and the IAEA; excess fissile material 
had been disposed of in the United States; international safeguards had been applied 
to the Sapphire highly enriched uranium blend-down; and 1100 United States nuclear 
weapons had been dismantled. 

34. In conclusion, she hoped to be able to report on further collective progress at 
the next session of the General Conference. 
35. Mr. OVTCHAROV (Bulgaria) welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a new 
Member of the Agency and associated himself with the statement which had been 
made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the European Union and associated 
countries. 
36. A year had passed since the NPT Review and Extension Conference had 
extended the Treaty indefinitely and expressly recognized the Agency as the 
international authority responsible for verifying and ensuring compliance with 
safeguards agreements. He commended the Agency on its implementation of 
safeguards pursuant to the NPT, and noted with satisfaction the progress which had 
been made with the development of new safeguards measures under 
Programme 93+2. The Agency's comprehensive safeguards agreements would remain 
a key element in encouraging international co-operation on the peaceful use of atomic 
energy within a stable security framework. 
37. Turning to the Annual Report for 1995, he was pleased to note that the Agency 
had not found any indication of diversion of nuclear material or misuse of safeguarded 
facilities, equipment or non-nuclear material. The overall increase in technical cooperation 
programme delivery was commendable and had resulted in a high 
implementation rate of 75.7%. The rise in the number of Model Projects, fellowships, 
scientific visits and training course participants was also most welcome. 
38. Bulgaria was grateful to the Agency for its help with improving the safety of the 
Kozloduy nuclear power plant and the strengthening of the Bulgarian Nuclear Safety 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 19 

Authority in the context of its work to assess the safety of plants in Eastern Europe and 
the former USSR. His country was strongly committed to the international efforts to 
enhance the nuclear safety culture worldwide, and was convinced that the safe 
operation of nuclear facilities should be a top priority for individual States and the 
international community as a whole. The Convention on Nuclear Safety, which would 
be entering into force on 24 October, should contribute significantly to the achievement 
of that objective. 

39. At the same time, it was essential to establish a generally acceptable and 
effective liability regime for nuclear damage which would attract broad participation. 
In that regard, he was pleased to note that the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage had reached agreement on many issues relating to the revision of the 
Vienna Convention. However, the amounts of liability which had been discussed in 
the Standing Committee had been considerable and Bulgaria, owing to its current 
financial difficulties, supported a "phasing-in" approach whereby a country's liability 
would be increased gradually over a longer period. Only in that way could broad 
participation of Member States in the new regime be ensured. Moreover, the revision 
process should not be separated from the work on the elaboration of a supplementary 
funding system. 
40. Turning to the Agency's programme and budget, he approved the proposed 
programme for 1997-98 and the budget proposal for 1997. With regard to the 
financing of technical assistance, Bulgaria would be paying a contribution in national 
currency equivalent to US $10 000 into the TCF for 1997. It greatly appreciated the 
Agency's efforts to improve further the management and effectiveness of the technical 
co-operation programme, and supported the measures which had been proposed by 
the Secretariat in that regard. He also endorsed the Secretariat's proposed measures 
for dealing with illicit trafficking in nuclear material and other radioactive sources. 
41. Nuclear power played a significant role in meeting Bulgaria's electricity 
requirements. In 1995, it had accounted for 46.4% of the total amount of electricity 
generated. The Bulgarian authorities had introduced a programme of reconstruction, 
safety upgrading and retrofitting at Units 1-4 of the Kozloduy nuclear power plant in 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 20 

order to ensure their continued safe operation. Work was being carried out in 
collaboration with specialists from other countries to ascertain whether Units 1 and 2 
of the Kozloduy plant were capable of remaining operational until the end of their 
design lifetimes in 2004 and 2005 respectively. Furthermore, in the past year a safety 
upgrading programme funded by the EBRD's nuclear safety account had been 
completed at Unit 3, and similar work at Unit 4 was still under way. Parliamentary 
approval had also been given to a strategy for energy development covering the period 
1995-2010 and beyond. According to that strategy, Bulgaria would have no option 
but to bring into operation the Belene nuclear power plant -construction of which had 
been frozen in 1990 -by the year 2010. 

42. In parallel with the development of nuclear power and nuclear science, the 
Bulgarian authorities intended to develop a programme for the application of nuclear 
methods and techniques in medicine, agriculture and industry. 
43. Bulgaria was grateful to the Agency, and in particular the Department of 
Technical Co-operation, for the assistance it had provided during the past year under 
national and regional technical co-operation projects, and for the opportunities 
afforded its specialists in the form of fellowships, scientific visits and interregional 
training courses. It looked forward to further fruitful co-operation of that kind. 
44. Bulgaria's energy strategy was based on a complex approach, the objective 
being to maintain a balance between the various established energy sources. To 
achieve that, construction of the Belene nuclear power plant would have to be 
restarted sufficiently early for it to replace the oldest units in the country. The 
reconstruction of Belene would also provide a good opportunity for the Agency to 
develop technical co-operation activities which could be used elsewhere in 
reactivating frozen nuclear projects and which took account of the technical and 
economic problems involved and the need to find specific solutions to the problems 
posed by the radioactive waste generated and spent fuel. 
45. Over the past year, Bulgaria had hosted a workshop on environmental 
restoration and a seminar on safety culture, and had received a number of specialists 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 21 

from developing countries for training at its institutes. Among the projects it had put 
forward for the 1997-1998 technical co-operation programme, it attached particular 
importance to the one on the use of electron beam technology for the purification of 
flue gases. 

46. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his country's support for the Agency's activities 
aimed at promoting international co-operation on the peaceful uses of atomic energy, 
and wished the Director General and his staff further success in their work. 
47. Mr. CHIDAMBARAM(India)saidthathewashappytoconveyhiscountry's 
pledge to pay in full its contribution to the TCF for 1997. 
48. The Agency was entering its fortieth year which, in his country, was regarded 
as a year of maturity and, therefore, as a time for reflection and fresh resolve. Since 
the establishment of the Agency in 1957, many programmes and activities had been 
implemented, some more successfully than others. Over the years, the Agency had 
evolved and grown into perhaps the most scientific organization in the United Nations 
system. 
49. Some of the more important milestones had been the Model Project initiative, 
the Partners in Development concept, the expansion of several nuclear applications 
programmes, the establishment of SAGTAC, and the streamlining and enhancement of 
a number of ongoing programmes and activities. However, the Agency still had a long 
way to go before it could claim that it had been able to serve the cause of sustainable 
development to an appreciable degree, especially in developing countries. 
50. The path ahead would not be easy. Many still remained to be convinced that 
nuclear technology was the inevitable option to satisfy the future energy needs of 
developing countries; that it was worthwhile to support nuclear technology-based 
programmes and activities in the fields of fresh water, food, health, and the 
environment; and that, for the Agency to contribute to the creation of a better world, 
it would need to pay the same attention to promotional activities as to nonpromotional 
activities. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 22 

51. India had always taken a great interest in the promotional activities of the 
Agency, partly because India had been committed from the start to harnessing nuclear 
power for peace, progress and development at national level. India's nuclear energy 
programme had been initiated over 50 years ago under the umbrella of the Tata 
Institute of Fundamental Research, barely two years after the world's first artificially 
created chain reaction had been achieved by Enrico Fermi and his team. The initial 
corpus of scientific talent at the Indian Atomic Energy Establishment had come from 
that institute. 
52. In August 1996, India had celebrated four decades of operation of Apsara -the 
first nuclear research reactor designed and built in Asia outside Russia -which was 
still being used for isotope production and some applications such as neutron 
radiography. On that occasion, the Indian Prime Minister had stressed the importance 
of India's nuclear programme for its long-term energy security. India hoped to have 
a nuclear power capacity of 20 000 MW(e) by the year 2000. The Department of 
Atomic Energy ran an impressive number of industrial units and research 
establishments which provided the infrastructure not only for the nuclear programme, 
but also for the promotion of both basic and applied areas of science and technology. 
The Government had engaged to provide whatever support was necessary for the 
further development of the sector. 
53. The Indian nuclear programme continued to be based on a three-stage 
programme of closed and combined fuel cycles utilizing natural uranium, plutonium 
and thorium. Currently, India had eight 220 MW(e) PHWRs and four others were under 
construction. Two 500 MW(e) and two more 220 MW(e) PHWR projects were to be 
launched shortly. As a first step towards the second stage of the programme, a fast 
breeder test reactor had been set up in which an advanced fuel -uranium-plutonium 
monocarbide -had been used successfully for the first time in the world. On the basis 
of that experience, an economically viable design for a 500 MW(e) prototype fast 
breeder reactor had been completed. Breeder reactors extracted several tens of times 
as much energy from uranium as thermal reactors. In addition, the "cold" 
commissioning of a third reprocessing plant at Kalpakkam had been carried out in 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 23 

March 1996 and the plant systems were being progressively tested before "hot" 
operations commenced. That was yet another milestone in the self-reliant 
development strategy followed by India. 

54. The Nuclear Power Corporation of India, with its vast reservoir of professionally 
qualified, trained and experienced technocrats equipped with state-of-the-art 
equipment, resources and analytical capabilities, had successfully diversified its 
activities to include the provision of consultancy services to industries in India, and 
was ready to offer such services to industries outside the country as well. 
Diversification of research and development into areas related to nuclear science and 
technology had been one of the hallmarks of the Indian programme. Close ties with 
industry enabled various processes and prototypes to be developed for commercial 
application. The spin-off benefits of Indian research had been applied in the railways, 
the oil industry, engineering analysis and medicine. 
55. In the field of agriculture, India had been developing new varieties of 
groundnut, mustard and various pulses and legumes via mutation breeding. It also had 
a strong interest in food irradiation for the purposes of preservation and minimization 
of losses due to sprouting and spoilage. Education and public awareness campaigns 
were under way to promote public acceptance of that valuable technology. 
56. As one of the largest isotope producers in the world, India was deeply 
committed to the practice of nuclear medicine. Most of the radioisotopes produced by 
India were used within the country for medical diagnosis and therapy, either as 
radiopharmaceuticals or radiation sources. In 1995, apart from exports to several 
countries, nearly 75 000 consignments of various products had been dispatched to 
over 800 user institutions in India. Several radioimmunoassay centres had been set 
up in order to extend nuclear medicine to areas not covered at present and catalyse 
the growth of nuclear facilities in various regions of the country. A technical 
collaboration agreement had also been concluded with a private organization on the 
provision of radiodiagnostic products for domestic use and export. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 24 

57. In recent years, the Agency had devoted a great amount of time and energy to 
the strengthening of safeguards via Programme 93+2. India had taken a keen interest 
in that issue and had expressed its concern that the financial implications of the 
programme might turn out to be excessive, that an overemphasis on the policing role 
of the Agency was creating an imbalance in the attention and resources it devoted to 
its promotional and non-promotional activities, and that the IAEA might end up by 
overreaching itself. Before setting itself new goals, the Agency should consolidate its 
current position, implement fully the measures contained in Part 1 of the Programme, 
digest the lessons learned, make a clearer assessment of the likely costs, and only then 
go forward. However, India would not oppose a consensus on the issue. 
58. India had also followed closely the Agency's nuclear safety activities. The 
Indian nuclear programme had accorded a prime position to safety in all its activities. 
Safety was also an important focus of research and development in the various 
institutions of the Department of Atomic Energy and dedicated groups had, since the 
inception of the Indian programme, been continuously monitoring and upgrading 
systems in line with national and international experience. Over the years, the 
regulatory system had progressively evolved and the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board 
had been constituted in 1983. The Regulatory Board applied the current international 
regulatory standards and had successfully executed its function as a watchdog over the 
nuclear programme and other facilities employing radiation. Nearly 50 safety 
committees operated at various levels under its aegis. India had also signed the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety when it had opened for signature and was currently 
preparing to ratify it, and it would continue to support all safety-related Agency 
activities. 
59. Aware as it was of the importance of an internationally endorsed approach to 
the safe management of radioactive waste, India had been participating actively in the 
development and drafting of a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management since the middle of 1995. While there was a high level of agreement 
among most of the Member States involved on many of the issues to be addressed by 
the convention, he felt the need to reiterate India's position on a number of issues. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 25 

Countries like India, whose nuclear power programme was based on a closed fuel 
cycle, viewed spent fuel as a resource rather than as waste and therefore outside the 
scope of the convention. Moreover, most of the environmental damage and other 
negative effects to date had been caused by radioactive waste from military activities. 
A convention on the safety of radioactive waste management could ill afford to be 
silent about such waste. 

60. India had been the first country to call -as early as 1954 -not only for a 
cessation of nuclear testing but also for a convention to ban the use of nuclear 
weapons and a comprehensive action plan to achieve a world free of nuclear weapons. 
India had joined every genuine effort to ban weapons of mass destruction and had also 
accepted every obligation in that regard. India's commitment to the goal of total 
elimination of nuclear weapons in the world remained steadfast and undiminished. 
Nuclear disarmament was a global issue. India had recently supported a proposal 
containing a programme of action for the elimination of nuclear weapons within a 
definite time-frame which had been presented to the United Nations Conference on 
Disarmament by the overwhelming majority of non-aligned and neutral member 
countries of that organization. India would continue to strive with other like-minded 
nations to achieve the long-cherished goal of a world free of nuclear weapons. 
61. The Regional Co-operative Agreement (RCA) had developed from a tripartite 
agreement between India, the Philippines and the Agency which had centred around 
the utilization of existing research reactors in the region. The time had come to 
include the development of nuclear power programmes within the scope of that 
Agreement. India had always supported, and would continue to support RCAactivities 
in view of the latter's useful role in promoting regional co-operation on the application 
of nuclear techniques in medicine, agriculture and the basic sciences. 
62. Finally, in the preceding year his delegation had pointed out the need for 
co-ordinated research programmes, training programmes and technical meetings 
addressing more advanced areas of nuclear technology in order to benefit the 
increasing number of developing countries which were attempting to enhance the 
levelofsophistication and capabilities oftheirrespective nationalnuclear programmes. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 26 

India would continue to support actively the Agency's efforts to promote and expand 
the peaceful uses of atomic energy for the benefit of people all over the globe. 

63. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that the current session of the General 
Conference coincided with the adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of a 
Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty(CTBT)reflecting the universaldesire tostrengthen the 
foundations of international peace and security. The Agency had an important role to 
play in that context by promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in the service 
of progress and prosperity. Nuclear disarmament, the strengthening of the safeguards 
system, and the wider use of nuclear technology for peaceful purposes constituted an 
integrated whole consistent with the Agency's "Atoms for Peace" policy. 
64. In the context of the ongoing efforts to strengthen the safeguards system 
through Programme 93+2, the provisions of paragraphs 4 and 5 of document 
INFCIRC/153 should be strictly applied, in particular the injunction to avoid hampering 
the economic and technological development of States and co-operation in peaceful 
nuclearactivities, including exchanges ofnuclearmaterialforsustainable development; 
and the provision regarding the protection of commercial and industrial secrets. In 
view of the importance of full implementation of the safeguards system, his country 
was of the opinion that the draft additional protocol to safeguards agreements which 
was being developed should be submitted to the United Nations General Assembly for 
adoption on the widest possible scale. 
65. Morocco had approved the extension of the NPT from the outset and it urged the 
Agency to use every means at its disposal to promote the underlying goals of the 
Treaty, namely comprehensive nuclear disarmament, appropriate safeguards for nonnuclear-
weapon States, and the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones. His 
country welcomed the conclusion of an African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty as 
an important step towards the establishment of similar zones in other regions, in 
particular the Middle East. In that connection, the African Group had reaffirmed its 
support for the Agency's efforts to strengthen the safeguards system in order to guard 
against the existence of undeclared nuclear activities or materials. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 27 

66. In supporting the plans to free the Middle East of all weapons of mass 
destruction, Morocco had insisted on a number of basic principles: firstly, equal 
disarmament obligations for all States in the Middle East; secondly, accession to the 
NPT by all States in the region without exception; thirdly, the placing of all nuclear 
facilitiesunderthe Agency'ssafeguardssystem;andfourthly, geographicaldemarcation 
of the Middle East region and neighbouring States in order to prevent political 
considerations from undermining the initiative. Fulfilment of those conditions would 
restore trust among the States in the region and lay the basis for peaceful nuclear cooperation 
in such priority areas as water and agriculture. 
67. Morocco had signed the CTBT and hoped that it would enter into effect within 
the next three years. It also welcomed the decision to locate the CTBTOin Vienna and 
trusted that close co-operation would develop between the Agency and the 
Organization, especially in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
68. His country was grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had provided with 
a wide variety of national projects, chiefly in agriculture, health, scientific research and 
water resources. It also supported the Agency's new approach to technical cooperation, 
in particular the preparation of national medium-term plans for the use of 
nuclear technology for development, and the Model Project strategy. A National 
Radiation Protection Centre had recently been inaugurated in Morocco which it was 
hoped would be involved in the implementation of many of the Agency's technical 
assistance projects in countries in the Arab and African regions, thereby strengthening 
South-South regional co-operation. The National Centre for Nuclear Energy, Sciences 
and Technology (CNESTEN) was about to sign an agreement with France and the 
United States for the establishment of a nuclear studies centre which would play a 
pioneering role in research and the application of nuclear technology in the social and 
economic sectors. Morocco had also established its first food irradiation facility which 
would be engaging in research and development in such vital areas as medicine and 
agriculture. 
69. The fact that the world's water supplies were diminishing as demand increased 
called for urgent action to prevent social and political conflicts over water from 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 28 

escalating into war. The water issue was a key factor in the Middle East peace 
process. The Agency could help solve the problem by including sea water desalination 
and the treatment of waste water among its priorities for technical co-operation, and 
by co-ordinating its activities with other organizations such as the FAO and the World 
Bank. Morocco welcomed the plan to hold an international symposium on nuclear 
desalination of seawater in the Republic of Korea in 1997. It urged the Director 
General to establish a standing advisory committee on the matter, and hoped that the 
Agency would play an active part in the conference on water to be convened by the 
World Bank in 1997. Morocco was about to conclude an agreement relating to the 
construction of a pilot seawater desalination plant in co-operation with China and with 
Agency assistance. 

70. In the context of African regional co-operation, Morocco welcomed the Agency's 
new policies which were designed to focus on the region's most pressing economic 
and social needs, in particular nuclear sea water desalination and waste water 
treatment, rehabilitation of arid and semi-arid zones, insect and pest control, food 
irradiation and strengthening of nuclear safety. 
71. The expansion of the Board of Governors through the amendment of Article VI 
of the Statute was a step which had to be taken during the current session of the 
General Conference. Urgency was prompted by three factors: firstly, the requirement 
in resolution GC(39)/RES/21 that the current session approve the report and 
recommendations on the matter submitted by the Board; secondly, the fact that 
20 years had passed since the need for change had first been recognized in resolution 
GC(XXI)/RES/353, a period during which the international community had made 
enormous progress in the codification of international relations -culminating recently 
in the extension of the NPT and the adoption of the CTBT -whereas the Agency's 
General Conference had shown itself incapable of amending a single Article of its 
Statute; and thirdly, the fact that the ratification procedures laid down in Article XVIII 
of the Statute were of such complexity that even an immediate decision to amend 
Article VI would take several years to enter into effect. Those currently deprived of a 
say in the Agency's affairs would therefore have to await the twenty-first century to 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 29 

see the birth of a more democratic, representative, and hence more effective Board of 
Governors. 

72. Morocco was fully aware that the task of amending Article VI was complicated 
by international rivalries, but such obstacles should not be allowed to inhibit the 
exercise of sound judgement or the ability to take collective action. His country had 
therefore decided to place its experience, disinterestedness and determination at the 
service of the international community by submitting a formal proposal for an 
amendment of Article VI. Its proposal was the only one that fulfilled all the legal 
requirements for a decision by the General Conference. In addition, it met all the 
criteria established by the regional groups, took account of global technological and 
geopolitical developments, emphasized the Agency's universality by providing for a 
balance between elected and permanent seats, reflected the provisions of resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/389 and subsequent resolutions concerning representation of the areas 
of Africa and the Middle East and South Asia, respected the established rights of States 
and regional groups, promoted permanent representation of least developed countries 
on the Board, and dispelled the confusion generated by floating seats. Morocco was 
proposing that the Board be expanded by ten seats (five elected and five designated). 
Given the increase in Member States, an expansion of the Board from 35 to 
45 Governors would not increase the ratio to more than one third of Member States 
and would therefore correspond to zero growth in real terms. Indeed, the percentage 
would gradually decline since a ten-year truce in respect of the amendment of 
Article VI would form part of the political compromise. 
73. At a time when the Board was acting as a global administrator of nuclear nonproliferation 
through strengthened safeguards applied primarily in the developing 
world, it was particularly unfair to deprive the countries concerned of a say in 
decisions that affected their sovereignty and shared responsibility. 
74. He trusted that the Conference would reach an acceptable consensus. However, 
if all else failed it might prove necessary to call for a vote. Article XVIII.C of the Statute 
provided that amendments would come into force when approved by the General 
Conference by a two-thirds majority of those present and voting. He urged all Member 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 30 

States who supported the Moroccan proposal to cast their vote should such an 
opportunity arise and, at all events, to sponsor the proposed amendment. Morocco's 
action was motivated by a firm determination to reach a consensus without further 
delay, in a spirit of mutual respect and shared responsibility, so that the Agency could 
face the future as a democratic and efficient institution whose credibility and 
universality were inextricably linked in the quest for peace and prosperity for mankind 
as a whole. 

75. Mr. KOSTENKO (Ukraine) welcomed Moldova as a new member of the 
Agency. 
76. The past year had been rich in important events for Ukraine. On August 24, 
Ukraine had celebrated the fifth anniversary of its independence. The path to freedom 
and democracy, when beset with immense social and economic problems, was not an 
easy one. 
77. Ukraine was gradually moving towards non-nuclear status and full compliance 
with its obligations under the NPT, and had completed the withdrawal from its territory 
of all the nuclear weapons it had inherited from the former Soviet Union. That 
development provided a unique opportunity to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
Central and Eastern Europe which would reduce the danger of confrontation on the 
continent and should help circumvent concern in the context of NATO's planned 
expansion towards the East. 
78. The conclusion of the Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty, in line with the 
recommendations of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, would be an 
important milestone in the consolidation of the international non-proliferation regime. 
He welcomed the recent decision by the overwhelming majority of United Nations 
Member States in New York to open the Treaty for signature during the 51st session 
of the General Assembly. 
79. Ukraine greatly appreciated the role played by the Agency in maintaining the 
international non-proliferation regime via its safeguards system. On 21 September 
1995, Ukraine had signed its safeguards agreement with the Agency pursuant to the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 31 

NPT. That agreement was soon to be ratified by the Parliament of Ukraine, and the 
currently valid agreement between Ukraine and the IAEA on the application of 
safeguards to all nuclear material in peaceful nuclear activities was being implemented 
successfully. The Government of Ukraine fully supported the Agency's activities and 
would continue to make every effort to support its work. 

80. Turning to nuclear safety issues, he noted that one important step towards 
improving the international nuclear safety regime would be the entry into force of the 
Nuclear Safety Convention. The Agency's role in providing a regime for the safe 
development of nuclear energy would grow enormously during the coming years. 
Improving the safety of nuclear plants was a slow process which would require 
changes in legislation, economic arrangements and management, as well as in the 
nuclear regulatory regime. It was essential to achieve a high level of safety culture at 
governmental level. 
81. The International Conference on "One Decade after Chernobyl: Summing up the 
Consequences of the Accident" had been held in Vienna in April 1996. Ukraine 
appreciated the attention the international community had given to that event. It had 
become clear that the Chernobyl accident was an international issue which could not 
be resolved without the assistance and financial support of the whole world. 
82. The President and the Government of Ukraine had taken a decision to 
decommission the Chernobyl nuclear power plant by the year 2000 if the necessary 
financial and technical support was available. In December 1995, a Memorandum of 
Understanding had been signed by the Government of Ukraine, the G-7 and the 
European Commission concerning the decommissioning of Chernobyl in which the 
parties had committed themselves to mobilizing funds for that complex task. 
Preparations were under way with a view to obtaining grants and credits from 
Western financial institutions to carry out the necessary work. Any delay in the 
granting of financial support would defeat the ultimate goal of decommissioning all the 
plant units by the year 2000, and would significantly discredit the political agreements 
reached. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 32 

83. Since the decommissioning of the plant where the accident had occurred had 
no parallels in world experience, it might be a good idea to establish an international 
research centre on the clean-up of radiation accidents where skilled experts from all 
over the world could work together to reduce the scientific, technical, social, 
environmental and medical issues involved. The centre could study the experience 
gained from cleaning up large-scale environmental disasters with the Chernobyl zone 
serving as an example. It would promote co-operation between Ukrainian scientists 
and engineers and research centres and laboratories throughout the world. Ukraine 
was grateful to the United States and other countries for the support they had given 
to that proposal and hoped that they would actively pursue its realization. 
84. His country supported the Agency's efforts to establish a comprehensive civil 
liability regime for nuclear damage. As a party to the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage, Ukraine had demonstrated its adherence to the main 
principles of that regime. 
85. Considerable and welcome progress had been achieved with regard to the safe 
management of radioactive waste, which was traditionally a rather complex issue in 
terms of public perception. International consensus was therefore particularly 
important. He hoped that the group of international experts who were working on the 
development of a convention on radioactive waste management would come up with 
fruitful results. Ukraine fully supported that initiative. 
86. His delegation was satisfied with the expansion of technical co-operation 
between the Agency and Ukraine. At present, nine projects of major practical 
significance were being implemented in the field of nuclear power. 
87. Ukraine supported the proposed budget for 1997. Owing to its economic 
problems, his country was not up to date with all of its Regular Budget contributions. 
However, it was doing it best to fulfil its financial obligations, especially in view of the 
difficult financial situation of the Agency. In 1996, Ukraine had paid nearly five million 
dollars into the Regular Budget to cover its contributions for 1993, 1994 and part of 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 33 

1995. The principle of zero real growth should continue to be applied, and the 
Agency's main activities should be financed from the Regular Budget. 

88. In conclusion, he approved the Annual Report for 1995. Ukraine valued the 
Agency's work highly and would continue to support it. 
89. Mr. MEADWAY (United Kingdom) associated himself fully with the 
statement which had been made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the 
European Union. 
90. The past year had been a landmark year for nuclear affairs in the United 
Kingdom, culminating in the successful privatization of the bulk of the nuclear industry. 
The nuclear review which had been concluded in May 1995 had confirmed his 
Government's continuing commitment to nuclear power, providing that it remained 
competitive and that rigorous standards of safety and environmental protection were 
maintained. The key outcome of the review had been the decision to restructure the 
nuclear power industry and to privatize the newer advanced gas-cooled reactors and 
the pressurized water reactors at Sizewell in 1996. The restructuring had been 
completed on 1 April 1996 with the creation of British Energy, the holding company 
owning Nuclear Electric which operated in England and Wales and Scottish Nuclear 
which operated in Scotland. The older Magnox stations and their associated liabilities 
had been transferred at the same time to Magnox Electric which remained in the 
public sector and would merge with British Nuclear Fuels Ltd. in due course. British 
Energy had been privatized successfully in July 1996. 
91. Nuclear power continued to hold its share of the United Kingdom's diverse 
energy market, contributing over 24% of the country's electricity needs in 1995. 
Privatization would mean a more competitive nuclear power sector with incentives and 
opportunities for further improvements in its operational and financial performance. 
92. On the international scene, progress following the 1995 NPT Review and 
Extension Conference had been encouraging. The United Kingdom continued to 
believe that the NPT together with the Agency's safeguards system constituted the 
primary assurance against the proliferation of nuclear weapons. The preliminary 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 34 

reports on the successful implementation of the Part 1 measures of Programme 93+2 
had been encouraging. His country had taken an active part in the wide-ranging 
discussions of the Secretariat's proposed Part 2 measures and it looked forward to 
further constructive work on that issue. Apositive outcome to those discussions should 
result in a significant strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system. The United 
Kingdom intended to contribute to the implementation of the Programme 93+2, in 
particular by applying those measures which would promote the effectiveness of the 
Programme worldwide, and by accepting those measures which would improve the 
efficiency and effectiveness of the safeguards applied by the Agency within the 
frameworkofhiscountry'sexistingsafeguardsagreement. ThehighprioritytheUnited 
Kingdom attached to safeguards in general and to the Programme 93+2 measures in 
particular had been a major factor in determining its support for the Secretariat's 
budget proposals. 

93. The NPT Review and Extension Conference had also endorsed the concept of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones and there had been considerable activity in that field. The 
United Kingdom, for its part, had signed the protocols to the Tlatelolco, Pelindaba and 
Rarotonga Treaties. 
94. The Moscow Summit on Nuclear Safety and Security in April 1996 had led to 
a number of significant achievements in safety, liability, waste management and 
nuclear material security, and important commitments had been made to various 
international conventions. The Summit had also given its explicit backing to the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. The United Kingdom, one of the early ratifiers of the 
Convention, welcomed its imminent entry into force. It had been encouraged by the 
large number of signatories to the Convention, and hoped that many more States 
would now ratify it so that they could play a full part in the implementation process. 
95. Radioactive waste management also remained an important issue. In the United 
Kingdom, work had begun on the development of a repository for high-level waste. 
On the international scene, his country welcomed the progress which had been made 
towards an international convention on the safety of radioactive waste management 
and hoped there would be early agreement on that issue. He also reconfirmed his 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 35 

country's support forthe completion ofthe RADWASSdocuments within the framework 
of internationally agreed procedures. 

96. To sum up, 1996 had been another important year for nuclear non-proliferation, 
building on the success and momentum created by the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference. The Agency had made considerable progress in addressing the new 
challenges facing it. The United Kingdom would continue to work constructively with 
the Agency and its other Member States to ensure that that momentum was 
maintained. Finally, he paid tribute to the leadership of the Director General who had 
contributed greatly to the Agency's excellent reputation. He looked forward to another 
successful year under his direction. 
97. Mr. MOHSIN AL-AKWA (Yemen) welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a 
new Member of the Agency. 
98. Since the last session of the General Conference, major political changes in 
many parts of the world had posed a tangible threat to world peace. The use of force 
had prevailed over the rule of law and new areas of conflict had emerged. During the 
same period, the United Nations General Assembly had approved the Comprehensive 
Test Ban Treaty. Against that background, the current session of the General 
Conference had to take serious steps to ensure the effective and impartial application 
of the comprehensive safeguards regime to all States, guarantee the non-proliferation 
of nuclear weapons and weapons of mass destruction, and promote the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy to meet the current and future needs of mankind. 
99. The double standards which were being applied in dealing with some States 
were a source of tension, hatred and extremism, and hence a threat to peace and 
security. Missiles had been fired at Iraq on the pretext that it had violated Security 
Council resolutions when it had merely been defending its sovereignty. Unfortunately, 
such pretexts had not been invoked when Israel had bombarded southern Lebanon in 
an act of flagrant aggression against a sovereign nation, and the same reticence was 
discernible with respect to Israel's possession of nuclear weapons and weapons of 
mass destruction. When Eritrea had occupied a number of islands in the Red Sea 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 36 

belonging to the Republic of Yemen, his country had sought a peaceful resolution of 
the conflict because of its commitment to international peace and security and the 
importance of the Red Sea as an international waterway. 

100. Nuclear energy, which had been developed initially for the purposes of 
destruction, was currently being used for the benefit of humanity in such areas as 
health, industry, sea water desalination and electricity generation with the result that 
many countries, including his own, were investigating the potential of nuclear 
technology as a development tool and a source of energy. He urged the Agency to 
pursue policies which responded to the aspirations of the developing countries for 
technical assistance. It was also essential to expand the Board of Governors in order 
to ensure equitable representation of all Member States, and to achieve a proper 
balance in the Agency's activities through action to increase the funds available for 
technical assistance while maintaining the Agency's supervisory role and promoting 
more effective application of safeguards. 
101. His country supported the Agency's work on small-and medium-capacity power 
reactors which would enable developing countries to use nuclear energy for electricity 
generation. It also commended the ongoing technical and economic feasibility study 
on the use of such technology for sea water desalination. Lastly, his country supported 
the Agency's efforts to prevent illicit trafficking in nuclear material. 
102. Yemen aspired to increase its co-operation with the Agency at all levels and 
warmly welcomed the international activities organized in its territory. Moreover, 
despite the difficult circumstances prevailing in the country, the Government of Yemen 
would continue to discharge all its material, moral and legal obligations to the Agency. 
103. Mr. CHU HAO (Viet Nam), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova as 
a new Member of the Agency, noted the significant progress which had been made 
since the last session of the General Conference in the field of international cooperation 
to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy and prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapon. The Convention on Nuclear Safety was to enter into force in 
October 1996, and the NPT had been extended indefinitely. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 37 

104. Viet Nam shared the deep concerns of many other countries in South East Asia 
and the world with regard to nuclear testing and wished to reaffirm its support for 
complete nuclear disarmament. That objective should be clearly laid down in the text 
of the CTBT. He urged all States, and particularly those with nuclear weapons 
programmes, to contribute actively to the early conclusion of the CTBT. Moreover, Viet 
Nam strongly supported every initiative aimed at establishing nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, in particular the Treaty on the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
which had been signed in 1995. He appealed to other countries to support that 
Treaty. He also commended the efforts to establish an Asia-Pacific organization for the 
peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
105. In recent years, his country had made great strides forward towards a market 
economy. The average annual growth rate in the gross domestic product had been 
8.2% for 1991-1995. The country's energy requirements were therefore increasing 
rapidly and nuclear power seemed a feasible option. A comprehensive study on the 
introduction of nuclear power was under way and it was hoped that assistance from 
the Agency and other Member States would be forthcoming. 
106. As a developing Member State, Viet Nam attached great importance to the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities. It was satisfied with the implementation of 
RCAactivities and looked forward to their expansion in the future. He commended the 
improved management of the technical co-operation programme which had resulted 
in a record high delivery rate and welcomed the introduction of the Model Projects. 
That new approach should contribute to increasing further the scientific and technical 
capacities of developing countries. In connection with the implementation of a Model 
Project on radiation and waste safety infrastructure upgrading, Viet Nam had recently 
promulgated an ordinance on radiation monitoring. However, the financing of 
technical assistance should be given priority and a better funding balance should be 
maintained between the technical co-operation programme and the safeguards 
programme while Programme 93+2 was being implemented. 
107. In conclusion, he said that his country was very grateful for the assistance 
provided by the Agency, and in particular by the Department of Technical Co

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 38 

operation, which was contributing to its socio-economic development and prosperity. 
Nuclear applications were becoming increasingly important in a number of economic 
sectors in Viet Nam. 

108. Mr. KASEMSARN (Thailand) said that, since the last General Conference, 
major developments had taken place in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and prevention of nuclear proliferation. He commended the Agency on the 
constructive role it had played in that regard. 
109. His country attached high priority to the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme. The application of nuclear technology was undergoing rapid expansion 
in Thailand in a number of fields such as medicine, food and agriculture, industry and 
the environment. Irradiated food had gained wide acceptance in his country and, as 
a food-exporting country, it appreciated the Agency's work on irradiation technology 
for food and agricultural commodities. Nuclear technology would certainly have an 
important contribution to make to the daily lives of the Thai people in the future, and 
the Agency had an important disseminatory role to play. 
110. The unsatisfactory developments which had been apparent since the 1995 NPT 
Review and Extension Conference regarding the financing of technical co-operation 
by comparison with safeguards were cause for concern. Thailand shared the views 
which had been expressed by other developing countries regarding the need to secure 
adequate resources for the TCF. The technical co-operation programme should be 
given the same weight and priority as safeguards. 
111. Thailand supported the Agency's efforts to strengthen the effectiveness and 
cost-efficiency of the safeguards system through Programme 93+2 and welcomed the 
implementation of the Part 1 measures of that Programme. It was important that the 
Part 2 measures, for which the Agency had no legal authority under the current 
safeguards agreements, were cost-efficient and that they respected the sovereignty of 
Member States. If applied equitably to all Member States, Programme 93+2 would be 
a most effective means of enhancing the nuclear non-proliferation regime. He 
welcomed the establishment earlier in the year of the Committee on Strengthening the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 39 

Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards System which had been 
entrusted with the task of finalizing a draft protocol which, when it had been approved 
by Member States, would be an international legal instrument supplementing the 
existing safeguards agreements. His delegation would co-operate fully with other 
Member States in that work. 

112. He commended the Agency's efforts to modernize its fiscal management and 
stressed the need to keep to the traditional zero-real-growth budget. Any increase in 
the next RegularBudget, particularly ifsuch an increase were not equitably distributed, 
would be viewed with concern by his delegation. In addition, he urged all Member 
States to make full and timely payment of their assessed contributions to the Regular 
Budget. 
113. Encouraging progress had been made with regard to the establishment of 
nuclear-weapon-free zones through the signing of the Rarotonga, Tlatelolco and the 
Pelindaba Treaties. Closer to home, the Treaty on the South East Asia NuclearWeapon-
Free Zone had been signed in Bangkok in December 1995 by the ten South 
East Asian countries, including Thailand. ASEAN foreign ministers had stressed the 
importance of expediting the ratification of the Treaty by signatory States. For the 
Treaty to achieve maximum effectiveness, the nuclear-weapon States would have to 
accede to the Protocol. Thailand had had preliminary discussions with the Agency 
concerning its role as the depository State. 
114. Thailand had co-sponsored and supported the resolution on the CTBT which 
had been given overwhelming support by the General Assembly in September 1996. 
Prior to the vote, the Thai Permanent Representative to the United Nations had stated 
the following: 
"The Treaty, in its current state, is long overdue and far from perfect. However, 
in spite of its imperfections, the Treaty promises for us all a brighter future ... 
my delegation would like to emphasize that Thailand's co-sponsorship of and 
support for the draft resolution that we have before us does not in any way 
negate the high importance that Thailand attaches to the competence and work 
of the Conference on Disarmament (CD), as the principal forum for multilateral 
disarmament negotiations. ... The international community has been dreaming 


GC(40)/OR.3 
page 40 

of a nuclear-free world for far too long. Now that we are about to move a step 
closer to our dream through the adoption of the CTBT, let us try our utmost to 
ensure that this Treaty will be come truly effective both in law and in spirit." 

He endorsed the choice of Vienna as the site for the Preparatory Committee of the 
CTBTO. The verification process under the CTBT and the Agency's safeguards regime 
were related and the Agency was well-equipped to provide technical and human 
resources for verification tasks under the Treaty. 

115. In conclusion, he congratulated the Agency on its fortieth anniversary and 
looked forward to continued progress in promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy 
and preventing nuclear proliferation for the benefit of mankind, building on its past 
achievements. 
116. Ms. CLAEYS (Belgium) said that her country fully supported the views 
which had been expressed on various agenda items by the representative of Ireland 
on behalf of the European Union. 
117. As a member of the Board of Governors, Belgium fully appreciated the work of 
that body but it did believe that its functioning could be improved. In particular, the 
time had come to find a solution to the recurrent problem of the amendment of Article 
VI. The consultations which had been conducted by Ambassador Bøjer of Denmark on 
that issue seemed to provide the basis for a compromise. Her country firmly supported 
a limited expansion of the Board which would maintain its efficiency while ensuring 
full participation of Member States with a sizeable nuclear programme. 
118. Belgium had been participating actively in the expert group which was working 
on the designation criteria for Board members. Agreement had already been reached 
on five criteria, namely nuclear reactors, ore production and the nuclear fuel cycle, 
radiation protection and nuclear safety, research and development, and nuclear 
applications. Clearly, not all the criteria were of the same importance, but the 
possession of a nuclear power programme seemed to be a fundamental factor. 
119. Control measures such as safeguards were intrusive in the sense that they 
involved the installation of special measuring and monitoring equipment and the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 41 

physical presence of international inspectors. Belgian industry, far from deploring such 
additional constraints, welcomed and supported them and had contributed 
considerably to improving the accuracy and relevance of such controls through its 
involvement in the national safeguards support programme. 

120. The safeguards system was one of the Agency's most important activities and 
an essential element in the struggle to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. Any 
improvement in the system was welcome, in particular through the use of more 
effective techniques and new methods such as environmental sampling and remote 
containment and surveillance. It was also important to define the different categories 
of plutonium in terms of their associated proliferation risk, to assign to them 
appropriate safeguards measures and to identify inspection costs. In that context, the 
report of the Canberra Commission on the wider issue of nuclear disarmament and 
verification mechanisms could serve as a useful guideline. 
121. Belgium had subscribed unreservedly in June 1995 to the Part 1 measures of 
Programme 93+2. Nevertheless, several important questions remained to be settled, 
such as the processing and analysis of information and the modalities for no-notice 
inspections. The Part 2 measures would certainly enhance the Agency's capacity to 
detect undeclared nuclear activities, but a legally precise and universally applicable 
text had to be developed which defined clearly the rights and obligations of the 
Agency and Member States. She hoped that the Board Committee which had been 
established for that purpose would be able to find compromise solutions which were 
acceptable to all parties. Moreover, the Part 2 measures should not be regarded as 
routine. In particular, expanded access should not be employed except to provide 
answers to specific questions relating to nuclear activities carried out by a particular 
State. In other words, Part 2 should be seen as an addition to rather than a 
replacement of the existing safeguards regime. 
122. Her country continued to contribute financially to the Model Project on the 
eradication of the tsetse fly in Zanzibar and was gratified to note the considerable 
progress which had been achieved since the last session of the General Conference. 
The effectiveness of the sterile insect technique had been clearly demonstrated in 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 42 

practice, and she hoped that it could be used with similar success in other African 
countries. 

123. In the field of agriculture, Belgium would be funding an Agency co-ordinated 
research programme over the next five years on the development of new banana 
genotypes using cellular biology and biotechnology techniques including mutation. 
The programme combined research, training and technology transfer and would 
benefit several developing countries where the banana crop was of vital importance. 
The aim was to develop new species of banana which were more resistant to various 
viruses and diseases. 
124. Turning to nuclear safety, she noted that Belgium had made extrabudgetary 
contributions to the Agency's programme on the safety of WWER and RBMK reactors 
in Eastern Europe. It had also been actively involved in international co-operation 
with the Russian Federation on radioactive waste management. 
125. Nuclear power continued to be one of the mainstays of Belgium's energy 
policies. In 1995, its seven nuclear power plants with a total net capacity of over 
5600 MW(e) had generated more than 55% of the country's total electricity output. 
The total net capacity would increase by almost 13% when units B1 and B2 at the 
Chooz nuclear power plant were commissioned in which Belgium had a 25% share. 
126. The firm Belgonucléaire had fabricated 30 tonnes of MOXfuel for nuclear power 
plants in Belgium and Germany. In addition, FBFC International had assembled 40 
tonnes of MOX fuel and 327 tonnes of UO2 fuel, making a total of 758 assemblies 
which were to be shipped to France, Belgium, Germany and Switzerland. In addition, 
the first MOX fuel assemblies had been successfully loaded into two of Belgium's 
reactors. 
127. Belgium had subscribed to the recommendations of the European Summit in 
Essen in December 1994 which had urged interested States to place fissile material 
from dismantled nuclear weapons under safeguards. Recycling of plutonium in MOX 
fuel was an effective way of achieving that objective. In that context, she looked 
forward to the experts' meeting which was to be held in Paris in October to discuss the 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 43 

utilization of fissile material from dismantled nuclear weapons, and the symposium on 
the fuel cycle which the Agency was organizing in June 1997. 

128. With regard to radioactive waste management, an interim storage site had been 
opened at Doel and an underwater interim storage site was being constructed at 
Tihange. At the same time the Belgian nuclear fuel company (Synatom) was working 
on the development of a spent fuel conditioning facility. In the light of the latest 
parliamentary debates on the management of spent fuel, the relative merits of 
reprocessing and disposal were currently being re-evaluated and, to that end, the 
programme on geological disposal of radioactive waste which had been developed by 
the National Organization for Radioactive Waste and Fissile Material (ONDRAF) had 
been extended to include spent fuel. It was hoped that a summary report on that work 
would be ready by the end of 1997. Pursuant to the government declaration on lowlevel 
waste, ONDRAF was preparing a report -which should be ready by mid-1997 comparing 
different long-term management scenarios for that type of waste. 
Moreover, the Nuclear Research Centre's underground laboratory in Boom clay 
formation was to be extended to accommodate new experiments. 

129. The Nuclear Research Centre was continuing its research into safety, waste 
management, radiation protection and safeguards. The BR-2 research reactor had 
been refurbished and was due to restart at the beginning of 1997. It would be used 
for scientific experiments, isotope production and silicon doping. The need to 
safeguard the existence of that type of reactor had been demonstrated at a conference 
on the role of research facilities in the future of nuclear energy which had been 
organized in Brussels by the European Nuclear Society. A feasibility study had been 
completed in collaboration with Ion Beam Applications on isotope production in a subcritical 
assembly fed by a spallation source. In addition, the Radioisotope Institute was 
still working on the development of automatic networks for remote monitoring of 
environmental radioactivity and on emergency planning. It had also embarked upon 
a new research project aimed at improving the production and extraction of fission 
radioisotopes used in nuclear medicine. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 44 

130. Despite its small size and its population of less than 10 million, Belgium had a 
considerable industrial potential in the field of nuclear energy. The development of 
the nuclear sector would not have been possible without a strict safeguards system 
incorporated in the broader framework of a multilateral non-proliferation regime. For 
that reason, and in the interests of global peace and prosperity, her country strongly 
supported the objectives and functions of the Agency as defined in Articles II and III 
of its Statute and would stand resolutely behind any new initiative by the Agency 
aimed at promoting universal recognition of the principles, rules and obligations 
inherent in the non-proliferation regime, and the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. 
131. Mr. ROMÁN-MOREY (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the Caribbean -OPANAL) acknowledged the achievements of four 
decades of fruitful and often difficult work by the Agency. Only 50 years had passed 
since the bombing ofHiroshima, the most unequivocaldemonstration ofthe destructive 
power of nuclear energy. However, when it was used for peaceful ends, nuclear 
energy offered immense possibilities. The Agency, with its successful track record of 
international co-operation in nuclear affairs and in the application of safeguards, had 
been the driving force behind the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy for the good 
of mankind. 
132. OPANAL was the first organization of its kind in the world and, apart from 
promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, its main goal was to prohibit nuclear 
weapons within the area of application of the Tlatelolco Treaty. That Treaty was 
perhaps one of the first examples of a confidence-building measure. Developed 
against the background of the Cold War and as a consequence of the 1962 missile 
crisis, its goal was complete disarmament and, in particular, nuclear disarmament. The 
30 years which had passed since it had been opened for signature had been a period 
of intense negotiations, hard work and great hope. In 1995, the Tlatelolco Treaty had 
become truly universal when the last of the 33 States in the Latin American and 
Caribbean region had signed it, thereby creating the first nuclear-weapon-free zone 
in the world. 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 45 

133. The example of the Tlatelolco Treaty had been followed by others: the 
Rarotonga Treaty in the South Pacific, the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
Treaty and, most recently, the Pelindaba Treaty in Africa. The conclusion of the 
Pelindaba Treaty was particularly important. First of all, it pertained to a continent 
comprising more than 50 States and, secondly, one of the States party to it was a 
former nuclear-weapon State which had voluntarily decided to relinquish its weapons. 
It was no coincidence that the Treaty bore the name of Pelindaba -the site where 
South Africa had developed its nuclear weaponry. The Tlatelolco Treaty had, in 
OPANAL's view, provided the foundation for what had been achieved on the African 
continent through the Pelindaba Treaty. He hoped it would serve to encourage other 
regions to tread the same path. Including the Antarctic Treaty with the four 
aforementioned Treaties, the southern hemisphere could declare with pride that it was 
the first to become free of nuclear weapons. 
134. Theinternationalinstrumentsunderpinningthenuclearnon-proliferationregime 
were the NPT which had been extended in 1995, the CTBT which had recently been 
approved by the General Assembly and, of course, all the nuclear-weapon-free zone 
treaties. Taking into account the planned "cut-off" treaty which would ban the 
production of fissile material, and the treaties for the prohibition of chemical and 
bacteriological weapons, it was clear that the world was gradually progressing towards 
a situation where the threat of a was which could put an end to mankind might be 
removed. 
135. The long-awaited CTBT had been a test of the world community's political will. 
All 32 of the full Parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty had supported the CTBT, thus 
demonstrating the region's unity on the issue of nuclear disarmament. Having gained 
the support of all but a few countries, the CTBT constituted a milestone on the road 
towards a global nuclear non-proliferation regime. Furthermore, it had confirmed the 
universal opposition to the rise of any new nuclear power. OPANAL sincerely hoped 
that the CTBT would enter into force before long, and that those countries which had 
not supported it would -out of ethical considerations -sign the Treaty for the benefit 
of the world as a whole. Only then would the international community have sufficient 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 46 

moral authority to demand a significant acceleration in the nuclear disarmament 
process. 

136. OPANAL's new approach now that it had achieved regional universality had 
been reflected in a number of activities over the past year. In December 1995, its 
General Conference had decided to establish an ad hoc working group for the 
strengthening of OPANAL. That group had concluded that the Organization should be 
strengthened in two ways: firstly, through action within the framework of the 
Tlatelolco Treaty which did not require any amendment to it; and secondly, through 
action requiring amendments to the Treaty. 
137. He thanked the Agency not only for co-sponsoring the regional seminar on 
"IAEA Safeguards: Verifying Compliance with Non-Proliferation Commitments" which 
had been held in Kingston, Jamaica, in April 1996, but also for its constant support of 
OPANAL. 
138. In conclusion, he announced that OPANAL would be celebrating the 30th 
anniversary of the opening for signature of the Treaty of Tlatelolco in February 1997 
in conjunction with the 15th regular session of its General Conference in Mexico City. 
He invited all the Parties to the Tlatelolco Treaty and those with observer status to 
attend, together with any others wishing to attend in an observer capacity. The 
organization would welcome the participation of any State which firmly believed in 
nuclear disarmament and, above all, in the future of nuclear-weapon-free zones. 
139. Mr. MIELNICKI (TradeUnionsInternationalofWorkersinEnergy-TUIWE) 
said that TUIWE naturally took a great interest in the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
technology and in safety and working conditions at nuclear power plants. He also 
commended the Agency on the role it had played in the fight against the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
140. Nuclear power remained a cause of concern to the international community. 
There was still the possibility that another accident like Chernobyl might occur. 
Nuclear power plants in Central and Eastern Europe, in particular in Bulgaria, Slovakia 
and Ukraine, were at risk. For example, the Kozloduy reactor in Bulgaria had been 

GC(40)/OR.3 
page 47 

commissioned without appropriate testing. At the seminar held by TUIWE in Moscow 
to mark the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident, the TUIWE representative 
from Ukraine had stated categorically that the Chernobyl nuclear power plant should 
have been shut down ten years ago since its continued operation endangered the lives 
of the plant's staff and those living in that part of Europe. He therefore welcomed the 
agreement which had been reached at the Moscow Summit on Nuclear Safety and 
Security that the plant would be shut down by the year 2000. 

141. The transport and safe disposal of radioactive waste was an issue of 
international importance which had yet to be resolved. Indeed, the disposal of 
radioactive waste and equipment from nuclear power plants remained the greatest 
challenge for the nuclear power industry and future generations. It was impossible to 
say exactly how much cooling of radioactive waste was costing and would cost in the 
future. Thus, estimates of the cost of nuclear power remained questionable. 
Radioactive waste was a time bomb and an international agreement should be 
concluded on the establishment of disposal sites which also guaranteed their safety. 
Furthermore, the monitoring of those sites should be given the same priority as the 
non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
142. TUIWE greatly valued its co-operation with the Agency and it followed closely 
any developments in international safety standards and energy policy. Every year, it 
organized seminars on a variety of topics. It had also collaborated with WANO on the 
drawing up of international regulations for the staff of nuclear power plants. 
143. In conclusion, he noted that TUIWE and the Agency shared a common goal. It 
would therefore welcome the Agency's participation at its seminars and meetings, and 
would be grateful for any financial support the Agency could offer. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

1.10 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
May 
1997 
GENERAL 
Distr. 


International 
Atomic 
Energy 
Agency 


ENGLISH 


GENERAL 
CONFERENCE 
Original: 
FRENCH 



FORTIETH 
(1996) 
REGULAR 
SESSION 
RECORD 
OF 
THE 
FOURTH 
PLENARY 
MEETING 
Held 
at 
the 
Austria 
Centre 
Vienna 
on 
Tuesday, 
17 
September 
1996, 
at 
3.15 
p.m. 
President: 
Later: 
Mr. 
SURYOKUSUMO 
(Indonesia) 
Mr. 
PADOLINA 
(Philippines) 
CONTENTS 
Item 
of 
the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
7 
General 
debate 
and 
annual 
report 
for 
1995 
(continued) 
1 
-199 
Statements 
by 
the 
delegates 
of: 
South 
Africa 
France 
Mexico 
Egypt 
Venezuela 
Norway 
Sudan 
Argentina 
Chile 
Holy 
See 
Netherlands 
Hungary 
Australia 
Switzerland 
Sweden 
1 
-8 
9 
-28 
29 
-39 
40 
-49 
50 
-60 
61 
-74 
75 
-80 
81 
-98 
99 
-110 
111 
-120 
121 
-133 
134 
-153 
154 
-174 
175 
-190 
191 
-199 



[*] 
GC(40)/22. 


The 
composition 
of 
delegations 
attending 
the 
session 
is 
given 
in 
document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 
96-03353 
(XXVIII) 


This 
record 
is 
subject 
to 
correction. 
Corrections 
should 
be 
submitted 
in 
one 
of 
the 
working 
languages, 
in 
a 
memorandum 
and/or 
incorporated 
in 
a 
copy 
of 
the 
record. 
They 
should 
be 
sent 
to 
the 
Division 
of 
Languages, 
International 
Atomic 
Energy 
Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 
5, 
P.O. 
Box 
100, 
A-1400 
Vienna, 
Austria. 
Corrections 
should 
be 
submitted 
within 
three 
weeks 
of 
the 
receipt 
of 
the 
record. 



GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
2 


Abbreviations 
used 
in 
this 
record 


ABACC 
Brazilian-Argentine 
Agency 
for 
Accounting 
and 
Control 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials 
AFRA 
African 
Regional 
Co-operative 
Agreement 
for 
Research, 
Development 
and 
Training 
Related 
to 
Nuclear 
Science 
and 
Technology 
ANDRA 
(French) 
National 
Agency 
for 
Radioactive 
Waste 
ANSTO 
Australian 
Nuclear 
Science 
and 
Technology 
Organization 
ARCAL 
Regional 
Co-operative 
Arrangements 
for 
the 
Promotion 
of 
Nuclear 
Science 
and 
Technology 
in 
Latin 
America 
Basic 
Safety 
Standards 
International 
Basic 
Safety 
Standards 
for 
Protection 
against 
Ionizing 
Radiation 
and 
for 
the 
Safety 
of 
Radiation 
Sources 
CPF 
Country 
Programme 
Framework 
CTBT 
Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty 
DPRK 
Democratic 
People's 
Republic 
of 
Korea 
EdF 
Electricit. 
de 
France 
G-7 
Group 
of 
Seven 
G-8 
Group 
of 
Eight 
HEU 
High-enriched 
uranium 
INES 
International 
Nuclear 
Event 
Scale 
LWR 
Light-water 
reactor 
MOX 
Mixed 
oxide 
NEA 
Nuclear 
Energy 
Agency 
(of 
OECD) 
NPT 
Treaty 
on 
the 
Non-Proliferation 
of 
Nuclear 
Weapons 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
of 
the 
Parties 
to 
the 
Treaty 
on 
the 
Non-
Proliferation 
of 
Nuclear 
Weapons 
OAU 
Organization 
of 
African 
Unity 
OECD 
Organisation 
for 
Economic 
Co-operation 
and 
Development 
Pelindaba 
Treaty 
African 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone 
Treaty 
PHARE 
Poland, 
Hungary: 
assistance 
for 
economic 
reconstruction 
in 
Europe 
(the 
programme 
now 
covers 
several 
East 
European 
countries) 
PWR 
Pressurized 
water 
reactor 
Quadripartite 
Agreement 
Agreement 
between 
the 
Republic 
of 
Argentina, 
the 
Federative 
Republic 
of 
Brazil, 
the 
Brazilian-Argentine 
Agency 
for 
Accounting 
and 
Control 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials 
and 
the 
International 
Atomic 
Energy 
Agency 
for 
the 
Application 
of 
Safeguards 
Rarotonga 
Treaty 
South 
Pacific 
Nuclear 
Free 
Zone 
Treaty 
RCA 
Regional 
Co-operative 
Agreement 
for 
Research, 
Development 
and 
Training 
Related 
to 
Nuclear 
Science 
and 
Technology 
(for 
Asia 
and 
the 
Pacific) 
RMS 
Remote 
monitoring 
system 
SAGTAC 
Standing 
Advisory 
Group 
on 
Technical 
Assistance 
and 
Co-operation 
TCDC 
Technical 
co-operation 
among 
developing 
countries 
TCF 
Technical 
Co-operation 
Fund 
Tlatelolco 
Treaty 
Treaty 
for 
the 
Prohibition 
of 
Nuclear 
Weapons 
in 
Latin 
America 
and 
the 
Caribbean 
UNSCOM 
United 
Nations 
Special 
Commission 
for 
the 
Elimination 
of 
Iraq's 
Weapons 
of 
Mass 
Destruction 



GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
3 


GENERAL 
DEBATE 
AND 
ANNUAL 
REPORT 
FOR 
1995 
(GC(40)/8) 
(continued) 


1. 
Mr. 
MINTY 
(South 
Africa), 
having 
congratulated 
the 
President 
on 
his 
election 
and 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new 
member 
of 
the 
Agency, 
said 
that 
one 
of 
the 
most 
significant 
events 
since 
the 
previous 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference 
had 
been 
the 
signing, 
on 
11 
April 
1996, 
of 
the 
African 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone 
Treaty 
(the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty). 
Unprecedentedly, 
on 
that 
occasion 
four 
nuclear-weapon 
States 
had 
signed 
Protocols 
to 
the 
Treaty 
and 
the 
fifth 
had 
indicated 
that 
it 
would 
follow 
suit 
in 
the 
near 
future. 
With 
the 
signing 
of 
the 
Treaty, 
the 
ideal 
of 
the 
denuclearization 
of 
the 
African 
region 
had 
become 
a 
reality. 
South 
Africa 
had 
embarked 
on 
the 
process 
of 
parliamentary 
ratification 
of 
the 
Treaty, 
which 
would 
be 
followed 
by 
the 
deposition 
of 
its 
instrument 
of 
ratification 
with 
the 
Secretary-General 
of 
the 
OAU. 
It 
was 
his 
conviction 
that 
the 
Treaty 
would 
contribute 
to 
global 
disarmament, 
strengthen 
the 
international 
non-proliferation 
regime 
and 
encourage 
the 
establishment 
of 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones 
in 
other 
parts 
of 
the 
world. 
He 
was 
grateful 
to 
the 
Director 
General 
for 
having 
organized 
a 
special 
briefing 
on 
the 
Treaty 
for 
African 
Governments; 
the 
briefing, 
held 
in 
Cairo 
in 
April, 
had 
highlighted 
the 
benefits 
of 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
and 
technology 
and 
had 
been 
greatly 
appreciated. 
2. 
Everyone 
was 
aware 
of 
the 
urgent 
need 
to 
make 
progress 
towards 
nuclear 
disarmament 
and 
non-proliferation. 
South 
Africa 
welcomed 
the 
recent 
adoption 
by 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
of 
the 
CTBT, 
which 
accorded 
well 
with 
the 
efforts 
which, 
on 
the 
African 
continent, 
had 
culminated 
in 
the 
signing 
of 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty. 
President 
Mandela 
had 
recently 
declared 
that 
South 
Africa 
stood 
ready 
to 
sign 
the 
CTBT 
at 
the 
earliest 
opportunity. 
Moreover, 
South 
Africa 
would 
be 
participating 
in 
the 
worldwide 
monitoring 
of 
compliance 
with 
the 
CTBT 
and 
earnestly 
hoped 
that 
there 
would 
be 
no 
more 
nuclear 
test 
explosions. 
Adoption 
of 
the 
CTBT 
was 
a 
first 
step 
towards 
attainment 
of 
one 
of 
the 
key 
objectives 
of 
the 
"Principles 
and 
Objectives 
for 
Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation 
and 
Disarmament" 
adopted 
at 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
in 
1995. 
The 
time 
had 
come 
to 
move 
on 
to 
other 
aspects 
of 
nuclear 
disarmament, 
the 
ultimate 
goal 
being 
to 
eliminate 
all 
nuclear 
weapons. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
4 


3. 
South 
Africa, 
which 
welcomed 
the 
recent 
conclusion 
of 
further 
safeguards 
agreements 
between 
the 
Agency 
and 
Member 
States, 
would 
like 
to 
see 
all 
Member 
States 
which 
had 
not 
yet 
done 
so 
entering 
into 
comprehensive 
safeguards 
agreements. 
It 
was 
very 
much 
in 
favour 
of 
strengthening 
the 
Agency's 
safeguards 
and 
subscribed 
to 
the 
principles 
underlying 
Programme 
93+2. 
A 
South 
African 
delegation 
had 
participated 
in 
the 
first 
session 
of 
the 
Committee 
on 
Strengthening 
the 
Effectiveness 
and 
Improving 
the 
Efficiency 
of 
the 
Safeguards 
System 
-established 
by 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
in 
June 
1996 
-and 
his 
country 
was 
looking 
forward 
to 
the 
Committee's 
second 
session. 
4. 
As 
regards 
technical 
assistance, 
South 
Africa, 
as 
an 
African 
country 
and 
a 
member 
of 
the 
OAU 
and 
of 
the 
Non-Aligned 
Movement, 
would 
continue 
with 
its 
efforts 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
Agency's 
activities 
responded 
to 
the 
needs 
of 
developing 
countries. 
Technical 
assistance 
was, 
in 
his 
view, 
as 
important 
as 
safeguards 
-and 
that 
should 
be 
demonstrated 
through 
action. 
For 
its 
part, 
South 
Africa 
would 
pay 
its 
full 
share 
of 
the 
TCF 
target 
for 
1997. 
During 
the 
past 
year 
it 
had, 
in 
addition, 
contributed 
substantial 
sums 
-equivalent 
to 
more 
than 
half 
of 
its 
TCF 
target 
share 
-in 
support 
of 
AFRA 
activities. 
5. 
The 
Agency 
needed 
to 
find 
a 
solution 
to 
the 
question 
of 
creating 
a 
much 
broader 
base 
for 
technical 
co-operation 
financing. 
That 
was 
a 
task 
in 
particular 
for 
those 
countries 
which 
wished 
to 
strengthen 
technical 
assistance 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
above-mentioned 
"Principles 
and 
Objectives 
for 
Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation 
and 
Disarmament". 
South 
Africa 
was 
therefore 
pleased 
to 
have 
been 
entrusted 
by 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
with 
the 
task 
of 
chairing 
the 
Informal 
Working 
Group 
on 
the 
Financing 
of 
Technical 
Assistance 
and 
would 
endeavour, 
together 
with 
the 
other 
members 
of 
the 
Group, 
to 
bring 
about 
substantial 
and 
early 
progress. 
It 
was 
already 
playing 
an 
active 
role 
in 
AFRA, 
of 
which 
it 
had 
served 
as 
Chairperson 
during 
the 
past 
year. 
In 
the 
course 
of 
that 
period, 
AFRA 
had 
readjusted 
its 
objectives 
so 
as 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
applications 
of 
nuclear 
technology 
met 
the 
needs 
of 
end-users 
on 
the 
African 
continent. 
More 
and 
more 
experts 
from 
South 
Africa 
were 
being 
made 
available 
to 
the 
Agency 
for 
technical 
co-operation 
projects. 
In 
a 
range 
of 
disciplines, 
including 
regulatory 
control, 
South 
Africa 
was 
acting 
as 
host 
to 
an 
increasing 
number 
of 
visiting 
scientists 
and 
fellows 
from 
developing 
countries. 
During 
the 
past 
year, 
more 
than 
50 
African 
specialists 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
5 


had 
received 
practical 
training 
at 
South 
African 
nuclear 
institutions. 
Also, 
four 
training 
courses 
had 
been 
held 
in 
South 
Africa 
for 
more 
than 
50 
African 
participants. 
Lastly, 
there 
were 
plans 
to 
establish, 
with 
Agency 
help, 
a 
post-graduate 
training 
course 
on 
radiation 
protection 
at 
an 
institution 
in 
South 
Africa; 
such 
a 
course 
would 
increase 
the 
availability 
of 
qualified 
experts 
both 
within 
South 
Africa 
and 
in 
the 
African 
region 
as 
a 
whole. 


6. 
He 
welcomed 
the 
establishment 
of 
a 
separate 
Department 
of 
Nuclear 
Safety 
and 
endorsed 
the 
priority 
being 
given 
to 
the 
harmonization 
of 
standards 
in 
the 
areas 
of 
nuclear, 
radiation, 
waste 
and 
transport 
safety. 
The 
establishment 
of 
an 
Advisory 
Commission 
for 
Safety 
Standards 
had 
been 
a 
positive 
development, 
and 
South 
Africa 
was 
very 
interested 
in 
participating 
in 
the 
work 
of 
the 
supporting 
advisory 
committees. 
His 
country 
welcomed 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
would 
be 
entering 
into 
force 
soon; 
it 
had 
embarked 
on 
the 
procedures 
for 
ratifying 
the 
Convention, 
being 
fully 
committed 
to 
its 
provisions 
-and 
in 
particular 
to 
the 
principle 
of 
competent 
and 
independent 
regulatory 
control. 
7. 
South 
Africa 
was 
participating 
actively 
in 
the 
work 
of 
the 
open-ended 
group 
of 
experts 
which 
was 
looking 
into 
the 
technical 
and 
legal 
aspects 
of 
a 
future 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
The 
need 
for 
broad 
application 
of 
such 
a 
convention, 
which 
would 
be 
important 
for 
both 
developed 
and 
developing 
countries, 
was 
absolutely 
clear. 
South 
Africa 
had 
therefore 
offered 
to 
host 
the 
fifth 
session 
of 
the 
group 
of 
experts, 
to 
be 
held 
in 
November, 
with 
a 
view 
to 
emphasizing 
the 
importance 
of 
the 
future 
convention 
for 
the 
African 
region; 
he 
hoped 
that 
many 
African 
Member 
States 
would 
participate 
in 
that 
session. 
Moreover, 
mindful 
of 
the 
need 
to 
ensure 
comprehensive 
control 
of 
the 
management 
of 
radioactive 
materials, 
South 
Africa 
had 
recently 
embarked 
on 
the 
process 
of 
formulating 
a 
national 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
policy; 
it 
was 
expected 
that 
a 
draft 
text 
would 
be 
ready 
by 
the 
end 
of 
the 
year. 
Lastly, 
South 
African 
specialists 
were 
participating 
in 
the 
work 
of 
five 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
standing 
committees 
or 
advisory 
groups 
established 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
advising 
the 
Director 
General 
on 
strategies 
for 
the 
future. 
8. 
In 
the 
short 
period 
since 
its 
political 
transformation, 
South 
Africa 
had 
been 
able 
to 
make 
a 
modest 
but 
important 
contribution 
in 
a 
number 
of 
areas. 
It 
remained 
committed, 
as 
an 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
6 


African 
country, 
to 
helping 
to 
promote 
sustainable 
development 
on 
the 
African 
continent 
and 
throughout 
the 
southern 
hemisphere. 
His 
country 
was 
grateful 
to 
all 
members 
of 
the 
international 
community 
-and 
particularly 
to 
the 
Agency, 
without 
whose 
goodwill 
the 
progress 
made 
would 
not 
have 
been 
possible. 
South 
Africa 
remained 
committed 
also 
to 
nuclear 
disarmament, 
to 
non-proliferation 
and 
to 
the 
achievement 
of 
a 
world 
free 
of 
all 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction. 
He 
therefore 
hoped 
that 
in 
April 
1997 
the 
Preparatory 
Committee 
for 
the 
NPT 
Review 
Conference 
to 
be 
held 
in 
the 
year 
2000 
would 
bring 
those 
objectives 
closer, 
so 
that, 
through 
collective 
efforts, 
the 
world 
might 
become 
a 
safer 
place 
for 
the 
present 
generation 
and 
for 
future 
ones. 


9. 
Mr. 
d'ESCATHA 
(France), 
having 
welcomed 
the 
approval 
of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
for 
Agency 
membership 
and 
congratulated 
the 
President 
on 
his 
election, 
associated 
himself 
with 
the 
declaration 
made 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
European 
Union 
by 
the 
delegate 
of 
Ireland. 
10. 
During 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference, 
the 
States 
parties 
had 
undertaken 
to 
endeavour 
to 
strengthen 
the 
Agency's 
safeguards 
system, 
and 
France 
was 
pleased 
that 
the 
first 
part 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
was 
already 
being 
implemented. 
However, 
Programme 
93+2 
would 
achieve 
its 
objective 
-the 
detection 
of 
possible 
prohibited, 
clandestine 
nuclear 
activities 
-only 
if 
the 
Agency 
was 
vested 
with 
the 
necessary 
information-gathering 
and 
investigatory 
powers. 
That 
was 
why 
a 
second 
set 
of 
measures 
was 
being 
examined, 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
Secretariat 
proposals 
revised 
in 
order 
to 
take 
into 
account 
comments 
made 
by 
Member 
States. 
The 
draft 
of 
a 
model 
protocol 
additional 
to 
existing 
comprehensive 
safeguards 
agreements 
was 
being 
examined, 
and 
he 
would 
like 
to 
see 
the 
committee 
in 
question 
pursuing 
its 
task 
with 
determination. 
For 
its 
part, 
France 
endorsed 
the 
broad 
lines 
of 
the 
protocol 
text 
under 
consideration; 
as 
a 
nuclear-weapon 
State, 
it 
stood 
ready 
to 
make 
a 
substantive 
contribution 
to 
Programme 
93+2 
by 
taking 
appropriate 
measures 
to 
prevent 
nuclear 
proliferation 
beyond 
its 
borders. 
It 
hoped 
that 
those 
non-nuclear-weapon 
States 
which 
had 
not 
concluded 
comprehensive 
safeguards 
agreements 
with 
the 
Agency 
would 
also 
contribute 
to 
the 
implementation 
of 
Programme 
93+2. 
11. 
The 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
had 
called 
for 
the 
conclusion 
of 
a 
treaty 
banning 
all 
nuclear 
test 
explosions 
and 
also 
of 
an 
agreement 
to 
end 
the 
production 
of 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
7 


weapons-grade 
fissile 
material. 
The 
international 
community 
had 
just 
taken 
a 
crucial 
step 
towards 
the 
attainment 
of 
the 
first 
objective, 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
having 
adopted 
the 
CTBT. 
France 
welcomed 
that 
fact, 
since 
it 
had 
participated 
very 
actively 
-
especially 
as 
the 
first 
State 
to 
speak 
out 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
zero 
option 
-in 
the 
negotiations 
within 
the 
Conference 
on 
Disarmament 
which 
had 
led, 
within 
the 
agreed 
timeframe, 
to 
the 
CTBT's 
adoption, 
and 
his 
country 
was 
ready 
to 
sign 
the 
CTBT 
on 
24 
September, 
the 
date 
on 
which 
it 
was 
to 
be 
opened 
for 
signature. 


12. 
Without 
awaiting 
the 
outcome 
of 
the 
CTBT 
negotiations, 
France 
had 
stopped 
nuclear 
testing 
after 
a 
final 
series 
of 
six 
tests. 
The 
test 
site 
facilities 
were 
now being 
dismantled 
and, 
at 
France's 
request, 
the 
Agency 
had 
organized 
an 
international 
scientific 
mission 
to 
assess 
the 
radiological 
situation 
at 
the 
atolls 
of 
Mururoa 
and 
Fangataufa 
-a 
mission 
which 
was 
proceeding 
well. 
Also, 
earlier 
that 
year 
France 
had 
signed 
the 
three 
protocols 
to 
the 
South 
Pacific 
Nuclear 
Free 
Zone 
Treaty 
(the 
Rarotonga 
Treaty) 
and 
the 
protocols 
to 
the 
African 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free 
Zone 
Treaty 
(the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty). 
13. 
An 
agreement 
to 
end 
the 
production 
of 
weapons-grade 
fissile 
material 
had 
still 
to 
be 
negotiated. 
France, 
which 
was 
completely 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
conclusion 
of 
such 
an 
agreement, 
was 
already 
complying 
with 
its 
intent, 
having 
ceased 
to 
produce 
weapons-grade 
plutonium 
and 
terminated 
-in 
June 
-the 
production 
of 
weapons-grade 
HEU. 
14. 
The 
problems 
of 
nuclear 
security 
and 
safety, 
which 
were 
crucial 
to 
the 
future 
of 
nuclear 
power, 
had 
been 
at 
the 
heart 
of 
the 
April 
1996 
Moscow 
Summit. 
France, 
which 
had 
presided 
jointly 
with 
the 
Russian 
Federation, 
welcomed 
the 
conclusions 
adopted 
there, 
particularly 
those 
aimed 
at 
improving 
fissile 
material 
controls 
and 
accountability, 
at 
preventing 
and 
combating 
illicit 
trafficking 
in 
fissile 
materials 
and 
at 
improving 
nuclear 
power 
plant 
safety 
standards 
and 
practices. 
It 
had 
been 
especially 
pleased 
about 
the 
reaffirmation 
of 
the 
commitment 
to 
fully 
implement 
the 
agreement 
concluded 
on 
20 
December 
1995 
by 
the 
G-7 
and 
Ukraine 
in 
support 
of 
the 
latter's 
decision 
to 
close 
down 
the 
Chernobyl 
nuclear 
power 
plant 
by 
the 
year 
2000. 
15. 
The 
Moscow 
Summit 
had 
opened 
up 
promising 
perspectives 
for 
co-operation 
in 
the 
safe 
and 
efficient 
management 
of 
fissile 
materials 
from 
dismantled 
nuclear 
weapons. 
An 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
8 


international 
expert 
meeting, 
with 
Agency 
participation, 
was 
to 
be 
held 
in 
Paris 
during 
October 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
reviewing 
the 
various 
options: 
long-term 
storage; 
vitrification; 
and 
conversion 
to 
MOX 
fuel 
for 
power 
reactors. 
France 
would 
do 
its 
utmost 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
meeting 
was 
a 
success 
and 
opened 
the 
way 
for 
concerted 
action 
aimed 
at 
the 
safe 
management 
of 
fissile 
materials 
designated 
as 
no 
longer 
required 
for 
defence 
purposes. 
Following 
the 
call 
made 
at 
the 
Moscow 
Summit 
for 
greater 
transparency 
in 
the 
control 
of 
plutonium, 
France's 
Ministry 
of 
Industry 
had 
disclosed 
the 
quantities 
of 
civil 
plutonium 
-
separated 
and 
unseparated 
-existing 
in 
France 
at 
the 
end 
of 
1994 
and 
1995. 


16. 
World 
energy 
demand 
would 
increase 
substantially 
in 
the 
forthcoming 
decades 
as 
a 
result 
of 
economic 
development 
in 
regions 
of 
strong 
population 
growth. 
France 
believed 
that 
the 
increasing 
demand 
could 
not 
be 
met 
in 
the 
long 
run 
without 
recourse 
to 
nuclear 
power. 
In 
that 
connection, 
he 
recalled 
that 
in 
June 
the 
Director 
General, 
speaking 
in 
Obninsk, 
had 
emphasized 
not 
only 
the 
economic 
but 
also 
the 
ecological 
competitiveness 
of 
nuclear 
power 
as 
a 
means 
of 
meeting 
the 
increasing 
international 
demand 
for 
energy 
without 
the 
emission 
of 
greenhouse 
gases. 
However, 
public 
confidence, 
without 
which 
there 
was 
no 
future 
for 
nuclear 
power, 
had 
to 
be 
gained 
through 
transparency 
and 
high 
safety 
levels 
-a 
responsibility 
that 
lay 
exclusively 
with 
those 
States 
which 
were 
engaged 
in 
nuclear 
activities. 
17. 
In 
the 
crucial 
area 
of 
safety, 
the 
Agency 
was 
nevertheless 
also 
playing 
an 
essential 
role, 
thanks 
to 
its 
ability 
to 
provide 
States 
with 
information 
and 
assistance 
at 
their 
request; 
thus, 
it 
had 
responsibilities 
as 
regards 
the 
assessment 
of 
safety 
levels 
in 
States. 
In 
that 
connection, 
France 
was 
particularly 
interested 
in 
the 
action 
being 
taken 
by 
the 
Agency 
in 
assisting 
countries 
of 
Central 
and 
Eastern 
Europe; 
the 
Agency 
should 
continue 
its 
efforts 
with 
a 
view 
to 
a 
significant 
upgrading 
of 
safety 
levels 
in 
those 
countries, 
the 
adequacy 
of 
whose 
energy 
supplies 
should 
at 
the 
same 
time 
be 
ensured. 
18. 
The 
adoption 
of 
international 
reference 
standards 
in 
the 
safety 
area 
was 
opening 
the 
way 
to 
more 
consistent 
and 
stringent 
safety 
practices. 
France, 
which 
had 
participated 
very 
actively 
in 
the 
drafting 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety, 
was 
pleased 
that 
it 
would 
soon 
be 
entering 
into 
force. 
However, 
that 
was 
only 
a 
first 
step. 
A 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
was 
being 
prepared, 
and 
the 
group 
of 
international 
experts 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
9 


established 
for 
the 
purpose 
of 
producing 
a 
draft 
had 
held 
its 
first 
meetings. 
There 
were 
still 
many 
difficulties 
to 
be 
overcome, 
and 
agreement 
on 
truly 
applicable 
provisions 
would 
be 
reached 
only 
if 
there 
was 
consensus 
regarding 
their 
technical, 
legal 
and 
political 
basis. 
Such 
consensus 
was 
not 
beyond 
reach 
provided 
that 
the 
principles 
underlying 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
were 
adhered 
to 
and 
the 
scope 
of 
the 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
convention 
was 
clearly 
specified. 


19. 
On 
8 
May 
1996 
the 
Russian 
Federation 
had 
signed 
the 
Convention 
on 
Civil 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage. 
Also, 
on 
12 
July 
1996 
Ukraine 
had 
decided 
to 
become 
a 
party 
to 
the 
Convention. 
It 
remained 
for 
those 
two 
countries 
to 
translate 
the 
Convention's 
underlying 
principles 
into 
law, 
but 
their 
commitment 
was 
already 
a 
meaningful 
step 
towards 
universalization 
of 
the 
civil 
liability 
regime 
in 
question 
and 
represented 
a 
major 
statement 
in 
support 
of 
closer 
international 
co-operation, 
at 
the 
political 
and 
the 
industrial 
level, 
in 
the 
nuclear 
field. 
20. 
The 
Agency 
was 
making 
a 
valuable 
contribution 
to 
the 
development 
of 
peaceful 
applications 
of 
nuclear 
energy, 
which 
was 
still 
a 
widely 
shared 
objective 
-and 
rightly 
so. 
However, 
the 
financial 
resources 
necessary 
for 
the 
Agency's 
technical 
assistance 
activities 
had 
become 
more 
difficult 
to 
obtain 
owing 
to 
present 
economic 
circumstances. 
The 
Secretariat 
had 
analysed 
the 
situation 
carefully 
and 
adopted 
a 
courageous 
approach 
aimed 
at 
improving 
efficiency; 
it 
had 
tightened 
up 
its 
organizational 
arrangements, 
launched 
further 
Model 
Projects 
and 
placed 
still 
greater 
emphasis 
on 
meeting 
the 
true 
needs 
of 
recipient 
States. 
Those 
States 
also 
should 
play 
an 
active 
part 
in 
that 
process, 
but 
the 
Secretariat 
was 
still 
faced 
with 
the 
considerable 
task 
of 
establishing 
the 
most 
suitable 
administrative 
structures. 
SAGTAC 
would 
provide 
a 
forum 
for 
the 
necessary 
in-depth 
discussions, 
and 
its 
recommendations 
should 
be 
considered 
with 
great 
care. 
21. 
Given 
the 
diversity 
and 
scope 
of 
the 
Agency's 
activities 
and 
the 
new tasks 
being 
assigned 
to 
it, 
the 
additional 
expenditures 
made 
necessary 
in 
particular 
by 
the 
strengthening 
of 
safeguards 
could 
not 
be 
fully 
offset, 
at 
least 
in 
its 
initial 
phase, 
by 
organizational 
cost-
cutting. 
That 
was 
why 
France, 
while 
appreciating 
the 
efforts 
being 
made 
to 
that 
end 
by 
the 
Secretariat, 
was 
prepared 
to 
waive 
the 
zero-real-growth 
principle 
in 
the 
case 
of 
the 
Agency's 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
10 


budget; 
at 
the 
same 
time, 
it 
would 
like 
to 
see 
all 
Member 
States 
paying 
their 
contributions 
in 
good 
time 
so 
as 
to 
spare 
the 
Agency 
the 
cash 
flow 
problems 
which 
it 
had 
experienced 
in 
the 
recent 
past. 


22. 
France 
now 
had 
54 
PWRs 
in 
operation 
and 
4 
under 
construction 
as 
well 
as 
2 
fast 
breeders. 
In 
1995, 
its 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
had 
generated 
360 
billion 
kWh 
of 
electricity 
-
5% 
more 
than 
in 
1994; 
they 
had 
accounted 
for 
81% 
of 
Electricité 
de 
France's 
(EdF's) 
output 
and 
for 
76% 
of 
the 
total 
national 
electricity 
output. 
Electricity 
exports 
to 
neighbouring 
countries 
had 
amounted 
to 
74 
TWh, 
a 
level 
at 
which 
they 
were 
expected 
to 
stabilize. 
As 
in 
1994, 
the 
availability 
of 
the 
54 
PWRs 
had 
been 
81% 
in 
1995. 
In 
the 
light 
of 
studies 
carried 
out 
by 
EdF 
since 
1985, 
the 
lifetime 
of 
its 
reactors 
was 
estimated 
to 
be 
at 
least 
40 
years. 
A 
satisfactory 
safety 
level 
had 
been 
maintained: 
78 
events 
had 
been 
classified 
at 
level 
1 
of 
INES, 
which 
comprised 
7 
levels, 
and 
there 
had 
been 
no 
higher-level 
events. 
23. 
France's 
nuclear 
power 
generation 
programme 
was 
progressing 
with 
the 
construction 
of 
four 
standardized 
(N4 
series) 
reactors 
of 
entirely 
French 
design 
and 
characterized 
by 
three 
major 
innovations: 
computer-aided 
controls; 
Arabelle 
turbines; 
and 
new-generation 
steam 
generators. 
The 
first 
of 
the 
four 
reactors 
had 
gone 
critical 
on 
25 
July 
1996, 
while 
the 
core 
of 
the 
second 
one 
had 
just 
been 
fuelled. 
In 
addition, 
France 
was 
pursuing, 
in 
co-operation 
with 
Germany, 
design 
work 
on 
a 
"European 
pressurized 
water 
reactor" 
(EPR). 
The 
date 
for 
starting 
with 
the 
construction 
of 
a 
first 
EPR 
would 
depend 
on 
future 
electricity 
demand, 
on 
the 
competitiveness 
of 
the 
design 
and 
on 
the 
need 
to 
prepare 
for 
the 
renewal 
of 
existing 
plants 
at 
the 
end 
of 
their 
service 
lives. 
24. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
nuclear 
fuel 
cycle, 
the 
Melox 
plant 
for 
the 
fabrication 
of 
MOX fuel 
was 
gradually 
approaching 
its 
nominal 
capacity 
of 
120 
t/year, 
which 
could 
be 
exceeded 
in 
response 
to 
demand. 
At 
present, 
seven 
900 
MW(e) 
PWRs 
were 
using 
MOX fuel. 
That 
type 
of 
fuel 
was 
to 
be 
used 
in 
9 
further 
reactors 
already 
licensed 
for 
that 
purpose, 
and 
it 
might 
ultimately 
be 
used 
in 
a 
total 
of 
28 
reactors. 
25. 
The 
reprocessing 
plants 
at 
La 
Hague 
had 
in 
1995 
run 
at 
their 
nominal 
capacity 
of 
850 
t/year 
each. 
Since 
1976 
nearly 
10 
000 
t 
of 
irradiated 
fuel 
from 
LWRs 
had 
been 
reprocessed 
at 
La 
Hague, 
the 
final 
waste, 
which 
contained 
only 
insignificant 
amounts 
of 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
11 


plutonium, 
being 
conditioned 
in 
the 
most 
appropriate 
ways. 
The 
inventory 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
existing 
on 
French 
territory 
was 
regularly 
updated 
by 
the 
National 
Agency 
for 
Radioactive 
Waste 
(ANDRA). 
Completely 
accessible 
for 
public 
scrutiny, 
it 
categorized 
the 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
gave 
the 
quantities 
involved, 
the 
activity 
levels 
and 
the 
storage 
locations. 
In 
his 
view, 
all 
Member 
States 
should 
establish 
such 
inventories; 
that 
would 
make 
for 
better 
management, 
facilitate 
communications, 
increase 
transparency 
and 
ensure 
that 
radioactive 
waste 
remained 
on 
record. 


26. 
The 
research 
on 
the 
management 
of 
long-lived 
radioactive 
waste, 
being 
conducted 
by 
the 
national 
commission 
established 
for 
that 
purpose 
in 
1991, 
was 
proceeding 
on 
schedule, 
the 
areas 
covered 
being: 
waste 
separation 
and 
transmutation; 
waste 
conditioning 
and 
long-
term 
storage 
above 
ground; 
and 
retrievable 
or 
non-retrievable 
storage 
in 
deep 
geological 
formations, 
with 
the 
construction 
of 
underground 
laboratories. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
last-
mentioned 
area, 
after 
preliminary 
studies 
conducted 
during 
the 
previous 
two 
years, 
the 
French 
Government 
had 
authorized 
ANDRA 
to 
apply 
for 
construction 
and 
operating 
licences 
for 
underground 
laboratories 
at 
three 
sites 
(two 
in 
clay 
and 
one 
in 
granite). 
The 
number 
of 
laboratories 
and 
their 
location 
would 
be 
decided 
upon 
after 
consultations 
with 
local 
elected 
officials 
and 
public 
inquiries, 
which 
would 
take 
about 
18 
months. 
27. 
The 
committee 
of 
experts 
appointed 
to 
advise 
on 
the 
ability 
of 
Superphénix 
to 
serve 
as 
a 
research 
tool 
had 
just 
concluded 
that 
the 
reactor 
offered 
great 
scope 
for 
studies 
relating 
to 
reactor 
operations, 
safety, 
plutonium 
consumption 
and 
the 
transmutation 
of 
long-lived 
waste. 
At 
Cadarache, 
the 
Commissariat 
à 
l'énergie 
atomique's 
radiation 
protection 
and 
nuclear 
safety 
institute 
(IPSN) 
had 
in 
July 
carried 
out 
the 
second 
experiment 
under 
the 
Phébus 
programme 
of 
international 
research 
into 
serious 
accidents 
at 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
with 
PWRs. 
The 
programme 
was 
being 
conducted 
by 
IPSN 
in 
association 
with 
EdF, 
the 
European 
Commission, 
the 
United 
States 
Nuclear 
Regulatory 
Commission 
and 
scientific 
organizations 
in 
Japan, 
Canada 
and 
the 
Republic 
of 
Korea. 
It 
was 
being 
funded 
from 
a 
budget 
amounting 
to 
about 
a 
billion 
French 
francs 
and 
was 
scheduled 
to 
last 
ten 
years. 
28. 
In 
conclusion, 
he 
said 
that 
the 
main 
lines 
of 
France's 
nuclear 
policy 
accorded 
in 
many 
respects 
with 
the 
Agency's 
objectives 
and 
that 
France, 
whose 
actions 
had 
an 
important 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
12 


international 
dimension, 
considered 
the 
role 
of 
the 
Agency 
to 
be 
essential 
and 
would 
continue 
to 
support 
the 
Agency 
and 
to 
participate 
in 
its 
activities. 


29. 
Ms. 
LAJOUS 
VARGAS 
(Mexico), 
having 
congratulated 
the 
President 
of 
the 
General 
Conference 
on 
his 
election 
and 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
to 
the 
Agency, 
said 
her 
delegation 
was 
pleased 
that 
a 
safeguards 
agreement 
had 
been 
concluded 
between 
the 
Government 
of 
Chile 
and 
the 
Agency 
and 
that 
one 
was 
soon 
to 
be 
concluded 
between 
the 
Czech 
Republic 
and 
the 
Agency. 
30. 
On 
26 
July 
1996, 
she 
had 
had 
the 
honour 
to 
deposit, 
on 
behalf 
of 
her 
country, 
an 
instrument 
of 
ratification 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety; 
the 
requisite 
number 
of 
instruments 
thereby 
being 
attained, 
the 
Convention 
would 
be 
entering 
into 
force 
soon. 
Mexico 
had 
thus 
demonstrated 
the 
high 
priority 
which 
it 
attached 
to 
safety 
in 
all 
activities 
connected 
with 
the 
peaceful 
utilization 
of 
nuclear 
energy. 
However, 
it 
believed 
that 
measures 
designed 
to 
strengthen 
nuclear 
safety 
should 
be 
accompanied 
by 
measures 
designed 
to 
end 
nuclear 
weapons 
testing 
and 
by 
the 
dismantling 
of 
all 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction. 
The 
Convention's 
entry 
into 
force 
would 
help 
to 
reassure 
public 
opinion, 
but 
it 
would 
have 
little 
meaning 
if 
certain 
countries 
persisted 
in 
refusing 
to 
embark 
on 
the 
path 
of 
nuclear 
disarmament. 
The 
wish 
to 
move 
in 
the 
right 
direction 
did 
exist, 
however, 
as 
the 
recent 
adoption 
of 
the 
CTBT 
by 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
had 
shown; 
that 
decision 
had 
highlighted 
the 
worldwide 
desire 
to 
advance 
the 
process 
of 
nuclear 
disarmament 
and 
prevent 
the 
qualitative, 
quantitative 
and 
horizontal 
proliferation 
of 
nuclear 
weapons. 
Mexico 
would 
therefore 
like 
all 
Member 
States 
which 
had 
not 
yet 
signed 
and 
ratified 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
to 
do 
so 
as 
soon 
as 
possible. 
31. 
For 
several 
years, 
Member 
States 
had 
been 
focusing 
on 
the 
very 
important 
question 
of 
strengthening 
the 
effectiveness 
and 
improving 
the 
efficiency 
of 
safeguards 
under 
Programme 
93+2. 
Mexico 
had 
supported 
that 
programme 
from 
the 
outset 
and 
had 
participated 
actively 
in 
work 
relating 
to 
its 
technical 
and 
legal 
aspects, 
constantly 
demonstrating 
its 
readiness 
to 
participate 
in 
field 
trials 
of 
proposed 
measures. 
It 
had 
welcomed 
the 
establishment 
of 
the 
Committee 
on 
Strengthening 
the 
Effectiveness 
and 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
13 


Improving 
the 
Efficiency 
of 
the 
Safeguards 
System 
and 
would 
participate 
actively 
in 
its 
next 
session. 


32. 
The 
Agency's 
safeguards 
activities 
were 
making 
an 
effective 
contribution 
to 
international 
peace 
and 
security; 
the 
additional 
protocol 
for 
reinforcing 
some 
of 
the 
measures 
provided 
for 
in 
the 
NPT 
would 
undoubtedly 
strengthen 
the 
non-proliferation 
regime 
and 
help 
to 
create 
the 
climate 
of 
confidence 
necessary 
for 
achieving 
complete 
nuclear 
disarmament. 
Every 
State 
should 
consider, 
in 
the 
light 
of 
its 
place 
in 
the 
international 
scheme 
of 
things, 
what 
it 
could 
do 
in 
order 
to 
help 
bring 
about 
the 
earliest 
possible 
completion 
of 
the 
work 
on 
drafting 
the 
protocol. 
The 
future 
of 
all 
peoples 
was 
at 
stake. 
It 
should 
be 
emphasized 
in 
that 
connection 
that 
the 
protocol 
was 
not 
likely 
to 
be 
finalized 
if 
a 
disproportionate 
burden 
was 
placed 
on 
the 
non-nuclear-weapon 
States 
possessing 
nuclear 
industries 
and 
if 
consensus 
solutions 
were 
not 
arrived 
at 
with 
regard 
to 
issues 
such 
as 
confidentiality, 
complementary 
access 
and 
respect 
for 
sovereignty. 
Many 
States 
would 
find 
it 
difficult 
to 
accept 
safeguards 
measures 
which 
other 
States 
were 
unwilling 
to 
accept. 
Nevertheless, 
Mexico 
was 
confident 
that 
the 
Agency's 
objectives 
would 
prevail 
and 
that 
an 
effective 
instrument 
would 
soon 
be 
in 
place. 
33. 
Another 
important 
question 
was 
that 
of 
amending 
Article 
VI 
of 
the 
Agency's 
Statute. 
In 
resolution 
GC(39)/RES/21, 
the 
General 
Conference 
had 
in 
1995 
requested 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
to 
continue 
consultations 
with 
Member 
States 
and 
submit 
recommendations 
to 
the 
General 
Conference 
for 
approval 
at 
its 
1996 
session. 
It 
was 
clear 
from 
the 
reports 
presented 
by 
the 
Ambassadors 
of 
Denmark 
and 
Japan 
that 
substantial 
progress 
had 
been 
made, 
and 
her 
delegation 
also 
was 
of 
the 
view 
that 
the 
question 
could 
be 
resolved 
soon; 
given 
the 
changes 
which 
had 
taken 
place 
recently 
on 
the 
international 
scene, 
Member 
States 
should, 
in 
a 
spirit 
of 
compromise, 
endeavour 
to 
overcome 
their 
differences 
and 
arrive 
at 
a 
solution 
which 
would 
provide 
the 
Agency 
with 
a 
truly 
representative 
Board 
of 
Governors. 
34. 
Mexico 
had 
always 
been 
a 
supporter 
of 
the 
Agency's 
technical 
co-operation 
activities, 
of 
partnership 
in 
development 
and 
of 
technical 
co-operation 
among 
developing 
countries, 
which 
it 
would 
like 
to 
see 
strengthened. 
However, 
that 
would 
require 
additional 
resources. 
She 
therefore 
urged 
Member 
States 
to 
contribute 
to 
the 
TCF 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
TCF 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
14 


targets 
and 
to 
pay 
the 
8% 
assessed 
programme 
costs 
due 
on 
the 
Agency 
technical 
assistance 
received 
by 
them. 
Mexico, 
which 
was 
pleased 
with 
the 
results 
achieved 
through 
Agency 
technical 
co-operation 
and 
partnership 
in 
development, 
congratulated 
the 
Department 
of 
Technical 
Co-operation 
on 
the 
high 
implementation 
rate 
attained 
in 
the 
previous 
year 
-thanks 
in 
particular 
to 
overprogramming. 
Also, 
it 
was 
grateful 
to 
the 
Secretariat 
for 
promoting 
technical 
co-operation 
among 
developing 
countries 
-to 
which 
it 
attached 
great 
importance, 
as 
it 
did 
to 
the 
concept 
of 
partnership 
between 
the 
Agency 
and 
Member 
States 
-and 
was 
participating 
actively 
in 
most 
of 
the 
17 
ARCAL 
projects 
currently 
under 
way 
by 
hosting 
regional 
seminars 
and 
making 
specialists 
available 
for 
missions 
within 
the 
region. 
The 
Mexican 
authorities 
would 
continue 
to 
collaborate 
actively 
with 
the 
Agency, 
offering 
the 
services 
of 
experts 
and 
possibilities 
for 
group 
or 
individual 
training. 


35. 
As 
the 
Agency 
had 
emphasized 
on 
many 
occasions 
with 
regard 
to 
Model 
Projects, 
it 
was 
important 
that 
nuclear 
techniques 
yield 
economic 
and 
social 
benefits 
for 
the 
end-user. 
An 
example 
of 
how 
that 
principle 
was 
being 
put 
into 
practice 
was 
a 
National 
Nuclear 
Research 
Institute 
project 
involving 
the 
installation 
in 
the 
near 
future 
of 
a 
cyclotron 
at 
Mexico's 
Nuclear 
Centre 
and 
of 
one 
at 
the 
University 
City. 
The 
first 
would 
be 
used 
for 
the 
production 
of 
radioisotopes 
with 
intermediate 
and 
short 
half-lives, 
and 
the 
other 
would 
operate 
in 
conjunction 
with 
a 
positron 
emission 
tomography 
system. 
36. 
Her 
delegation 
hoped 
that 
the 
results 
achieved 
would 
encourage 
the 
Secretariat 
to 
pursue 
its 
efforts 
to 
strengthen 
technical 
co-operation, 
taking 
into 
account 
the 
useful 
recommendations 
made 
by 
SAGTAC. 
That 
having 
been 
said, 
as 
was 
clear 
from 
the 
Director 
General's 
report 
on 
the 
matter, 
it 
should 
be 
possible 
to 
find 
new 
financing 
sources 
external 
to 
the 
Agency. 
The 
Secretariat 
should 
intensify 
its 
efforts 
in 
that 
connection; 
in 
fact, 
perhaps 
the 
Secretariat 
could 
be 
authorized 
to 
assign 
the 
responsibility 
for 
those 
efforts 
to 
a 
number 
of 
its 
senior 
officials. 
37. 
Technical 
co-operation 
could 
not 
expand 
without 
rapid 
information 
exchange. 
The 
Secretariat 
had 
made 
remarkable 
progress 
in 
that 
respect 
through 
access 
to 
Internet 
services 
and 
through 
its 
1995-96 
information 
technology 
plan, 
which 
should 
result 
in 
enhanced 
electronic 
communications 
with 
other 
organizations 
and 
with 
Member 
States. 
Such 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
15 


initiatives 
were 
extremely 
useful 
and 
should 
be 
extended. 
Appreciable 
savings 
of 
time 
and 
money 
would 
be 
possible 
if 
not 
only 
technical 
co-operation 
project 
proposals, 
but 
also 
fellowship, 
scientific 
visit 
and 
training 
course 
requests 
were 
submitted 
in 
electronic 
form. 
Moreover, 
electronic 
communications 
should 
be 
employed 
not 
only 
by 
the 
Department 
of 
Technical 
Co-operation, 
but 
also 
by 
other 
Departments 
of 
the 
Secretariat, 
to 
make 
the 
numerous 
working 
documents 
exchanged 
between 
the 
Agency 
and 
Member 
States 
available 
in 
electronic 
form. 


38. 
In 
many 
countries, 
nuclear 
technologies 
did 
not 
have 
a 
very 
good 
public 
image 
-a 
major 
obstacle 
to 
the 
formulation 
of 
technically 
sound 
projects 
of 
undoubted 
potential 
benefit 
to 
the 
public. 
Consequently, 
Mexico 
was 
still 
endeavouring 
to 
improve 
that 
image. 
In 
May 
1996, 
a 
seminar 
on 
"Atoms 
for 
development" 
sponsored 
by 
the 
National 
Nuclear 
Research 
Institute 
and 
the 
Agency 
had 
been 
held 
in 
Mexico; 
attended 
by 
over 
500 
persons, 
the 
seminar 
had 
made 
abundantly 
clear 
the 
way 
in 
which 
nuclear 
technologies 
were 
benefiting 
Mexico 
and 
the 
world 
as 
a 
whole. 
During 
the 
visit 
which 
he 
had 
paid 
to 
Mexico 
on 
that 
occasion, 
the 
Director 
General 
had 
met 
the 
Mexican 
President, 
who 
had 
expressed 
his 
wish 
to 
see 
the 
peaceful 
utilization 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
in 
Mexico 
further 
expanded. 
39. 
Mexico 
had 
great 
confidence 
in 
the 
Agency 
and 
attached 
great 
importance 
to 
the 
work 
of 
the 
General 
Conference. 
The 
international 
community 
longed 
for 
security 
and 
could 
not 
content 
itself 
with 
words 
and 
empty 
promises. 
On 
the 
one 
hand, 
however, 
there 
were 
States 
unwilling 
to 
share 
the 
advantages 
which 
they 
enjoyed; 
on 
the 
other, 
there 
were 
States 
with 
nothing 
to 
share 
but 
their 
patience. 
As 
long 
as 
that 
situation 
existed, 
it 
would 
be 
impossible 
to 
overcome 
the 
differences. 
The 
future 
being 
uncertain 
for 
all, 
including 
the 
Agency, 
she 
would 
like 
delegations 
to 
be 
open-minded 
and 
to 
join 
together 
in 
a 
sincere 
effort 
to 
arrive 
at 
results 
consistent 
with 
the 
aspirations 
of 
the 
great 
majority 
of 
nations. 
40. 
Mr. 
EL-FEKI 
(Egypt), 
welcoming 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new member 
of 
the 
Agency, 
said 
that 
in 
1996, 
twenty-two 
years 
after 
adoption 
of 
the 
Declaration 
on 
the 
Denuclearization 
of 
Africa, 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty 
on 
a 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone 
in 
Africa 
had 
been 
signed 
in 
Cairo. 
Underlining 
that, 
as 
indicated 
in 
the 
preamble 
of 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty, 
the 
establishment 
of 
other 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, 
especially 
in 
the 
Middle 
East, 
would 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
16 


enhance 
the 
security 
of 
States 
Parties, 
he 
thanked 
the 
Agency 
for 
its 
contribution 
to 
the 
preparation 
of 
the 
final 
text 
and 
hoped 
that 
signature 
of 
the 
Treaty 
would 
help 
increase 
co-operation 
in 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
between 
the 
Agency 
and 
the 
African 
Commission 
on 
Nuclear 
Energy, 
whose 
headquarters 
were 
in 
South 
Africa. 


41. 
Peace 
and 
security 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
region 
should 
be 
based 
on 
the 
principle 
of 
equal 
rights 
and 
obligations 
at 
a 
minimum 
level 
of 
armaments. 
The 
presence 
of 
an 
unsafeguarded 
nuclear 
programme 
on 
its 
eastern 
borders 
posed 
a 
very 
serious 
threat 
to 
Egypt. 
Egypt’s 
standpoint 
was 
not 
based 
on 
opposition 
to 
any 
particular 
State 
but 
on 
the 
conviction 
that 
elimination 
of 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction 
was 
in 
the 
interest 
of 
all 
the 
peoples 
of 
the 
region. 
It 
was 
in 
that 
spirit 
that 
Egypt 
had 
been 
advocating, 
since 
1974, 
the 
establishment 
of 
a 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
and 
had 
launched, 
in 
1990, 
an 
initiative 
to 
make 
the 
region 
a 
zone 
free 
of 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction, 
including 
nuclear, 
chemical, 
and 
biological 
weapons. 
To 
that 
end 
it 
had 
proposed 
that 
formal 
multilateral 
negotiations 
be 
entered 
into 
and 
that 
all 
the 
States 
of 
the 
region 
accede 
to 
the 
international 
instruments 
pertaining 
to 
the 
non-proliferation 
of 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction 
within 
the 
time 
it 
would 
take 
to 
conclude 
peace 
agreements 
between 
Israel 
and 
the 
other 
parties 
in 
the 
peace 
process. 
42. 
Egypt 
considered 
that 
the 
application 
of 
full-scope 
Agency 
safeguards 
to 
the 
Middle 
East 
would 
be 
an 
extremely 
important 
step 
giving 
momentum 
to 
efforts 
to 
create 
a 
nuclear-
weapon-free 
zone 
in 
the 
region. 
That 
objective 
also 
had 
the 
support 
of 
the 
international 
community. 
The 
following 
examples, 
in 
addition 
to 
the 
elements 
highlighted 
in 
the 
Director 
General's 
report, 
bore 
witness 
to 
that. 
The 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
had 
adopted, 
by 
consensus, 
a 
resolution 
on 
the 
Middle 
East, 
in 
which 
it 
noted 
with 
concern 
the 
continued 
existence 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
of 
unsafeguarded 
nuclear 
facilities, 
urged 
non-parties 
to 
the 
Treaty 
which 
operated 
such 
facilities 
to 
accept 
full-scope 
Agency 
safeguards 
and 
called 
on 
all 
States 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
to 
take 
practical 
steps 
in 
appropriate 
forums 
aimed 
at 
making 
progress 
towards 
the 
establishment 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
of 
a 
zone 
free 
of 
weapons 
of 
mass 
destruction. 
Likewise, 
the 
Cairo 
Declaration, 
adopted 
on 
the 
occasion 
of 
the 
signature 
of 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty, 
emphasized 
that 
the 
establishment 
of 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, 
especially 
in 
regions 
of 
tension 
such 
as 
the 
Middle 
East, 
enhanced 
global 
and 
regional 
peace 
and 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
17 


security. 
The 
statement 
made 
by 
the 
Presidency 
of 
the 
European 
Union 
on 
the 
occasion 
of 
the 
signature 
of 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty 
also 
fully 
reflected 
that 
view. 


43. 
In 
spite 
of 
that 
international 
support, 
it 
appeared 
from 
the 
Director 
General's 
report 
contained 
in 
document 
GC(40)/6, 
that 
no 
tangible 
progress 
had 
been 
made 
in 
that 
regard. 
The 
report 
pointed 
out 
that 
while 
most 
States 
of 
the 
region 
wanted 
full-scope 
Agency 
safeguards 
to 
be 
applied 
to 
all 
nuclear 
activities 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
pursuant 
to 
accession 
to 
the 
NPT 
or 
through 
the 
establishment 
of 
a 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone, 
one 
State 
believed 
that 
the 
application 
of 
safeguards 
or 
the 
establishment 
of 
such 
a 
zone 
should 
follow the 
conclusion 
of 
a 
comprehensive 
peace 
agreement 
in 
the 
Middle 
East. 
Egypt 
felt 
that 
peace 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
would 
ensue 
once 
the 
nuclear 
and 
disarmament 
issues 
had 
been 
settled 
and 
measures 
to 
ensure 
the 
transparency 
of 
nuclear 
programmes 
had 
been 
adopted. 
44. 
Egypt 
considered 
it 
certainly 
worthwhile 
for 
the 
Agency 
to 
participate 
in 
the 
activities 
of 
the 
multilateral 
working 
group 
on 
arms 
control 
and 
regional 
security 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
multilateral 
Middle 
East 
negotiations, 
but 
also 
essential 
that 
it 
continue 
to 
make 
efforts 
to 
apply 
full-scope 
safeguards 
in 
the 
region. 
It 
therefore 
urged 
the 
Agency 
to 
adopt 
determined 
measures, 
including 
the 
organization 
of 
dedicated 
workshops 
to 
review the 
technical 
modalities 
and 
procedures 
to 
free 
the 
Middle 
East 
from 
nuclear 
weapons. 
45. 
The 
application 
of 
full-scope 
safeguards, 
while 
fundamentally 
serving 
the 
cause 
of 
nuclear 
weapons 
non-proliferation, 
also 
strengthened 
mutual 
confidence 
in 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
and 
nuclear 
safety. 
Any 
mystery 
shrouding 
nuclear 
installations 
and 
activities 
aroused 
the 
concern 
of 
the 
governments 
and 
peoples 
of 
the 
region, 
as 
shown 
by 
the 
fears 
instigated 
by 
information 
of 
Israeli 
origin 
that 
there 
had 
been 
radioactive 
leakage 
from 
nuclear 
waste 
from 
the 
Dimona 
reactor 
in 
April 
1996. 
Those 
fears 
were 
due 
to 
the 
total 
lack 
of 
transparency, 
of 
international 
supervision 
and 
of 
safeguards. 
Nuclear 
safety 
was 
of 
increased 
importance 
in 
that 
regard, 
as 
shown 
by 
the 
fact 
that 
a 
summit 
conference 
on 
that 
topic 
had 
been 
organized 
in 
Moscow 
in 
April 
1996. 
Similarly, 
the 
G-7 
at 
their 
meeting 
in 
Lyon 
had 
underlined 
that 
nuclear 
safety 
should 
take 
precedence 
over 
all 
other 
considerations. 
46. 
With 
regard 
to 
Part 
2 
of 
Programme 
93+2, 
Egypt 
considered 
that 
the 
final 
text 
of 
the 
proposals 
should 
be 
formulated 
in 
such 
a 
way 
as 
to 
avoid 
as 
far 
as 
possible 
encroachment 
by 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
18 


the 
safeguards 
system 
on 
non-nuclear 
spheres 
and 
on 
research 
and 
development 
activities, 
and 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
right 
of 
States 
to 
take 
advantage 
of 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
was 
not 
undermined. 
In 
order 
to 
be 
effective, 
that 
system 
should 
be 
applied 
in 
an 
objective 
and 
non-discriminatory 
fashion 
and, 
furthermore, 
it 
should 
ensure 
the 
transparency 
of 
the 
nuclear 
programmes 
of 
all 
countries. 
He 
pointed 
out 
that 
the 
placing 
of 
new responsibilities 
and 
obligations 
only 
on 
States 
with 
full-scope 
safeguards 
agreements 
might 
encourage 
certain 
States 
to 
maintain 
non-comprehensive 
safeguards 
agreements, 
which 
would 
not 
only 
run 
counter 
to 
nuclear 
arms 
non-proliferation 
but 
also 
be 
politically 
untenable. 


47. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
CTBT 
just 
adopted 
by 
the 
General 
Assembly, 
Egypt 
believed, 
despite 
reservations 
it 
had 
about 
certain 
paragraphs, 
that 
the 
final 
text 
of 
the 
Treaty 
offered 
an 
acceptable 
basis. 
Thus, 
as 
reiterated 
on 
several 
occasions 
by 
Egypt’s 
President 
and 
Minister 
of 
Foreign 
Affairs, 
his 
country 
was 
prepared 
to 
sign 
the 
Treaty 
as 
soon 
as 
Israel 
had. 
In 
view 
of 
all 
those 
developments, 
it 
was 
important 
that 
the 
Agency 
expand 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors. 
That 
matter 
was 
even 
more 
pressing 
now 
that 
the 
number 
of 
Member 
States 
had 
increased 
considerably. 
Recalling 
resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/389, 
adopted 
by 
consensus, 
which 
pointed 
out 
that 
Africa 
was 
under-represented 
on 
the 
Board, 
he 
stressed 
that 
there 
was 
a 
need 
to 
remedy 
that 
situation 
and 
that 
the 
reservations 
expressed 
by 
certain 
delegations 
in 
the 
early 
stages 
of 
negotiations 
were 
no 
longer 
valid. 
Expansion 
of 
the 
Board 
would 
enable 
increased 
participation 
by 
States, 
particularly 
developing 
States, 
in 
the 
Agency's 
activities, 
thereby 
strengthening 
its 
moral 
and 
political 
authority 
and 
increasing 
its 
effectiveness. 
48. 
Egypt 
was 
pursuing 
efforts 
to 
make 
use 
of 
nuclear 
technologies 
in 
its 
development 
programmes. 
Thus, 
the 
Egyptian 
Atomic 
Energy 
Commission 
was 
about 
to 
commission 
a 
gamma 
irradiator 
for 
use 
in 
the 
preservation 
of 
foodstuffs. 
Likewise, 
a 
multipurpose 
22 
MW 
research 
reactor 
was 
due 
to 
go 
into 
service 
by 
the 
end 
of 
1997. 
In 
addition, 
nuclear 
power 
remained 
one 
of 
the 
most 
important 
options 
open 
to 
Egypt, 
which 
was 
also 
continuing 
to 
prospect 
for 
nuclear 
raw 
materials 
and 
other 
materials 
linked 
to 
the 
fuel 
cycle. 
49. 
The 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
opened 
new 
perspectives 
in 
economic 
development. 
Egypt 
therefore 
felt 
the 
Agency 
had 
an 
important 
role 
to 
play 
in 
technical 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
19 


co-operation 
and 
the 
transfer 
of 
technology. 
Egypt, 
which 
always 
paid 
more 
than 
its 
share 
of 
the 
target 
for 
voluntary 
contributions 
to 
the 
TCF, 
also 
hoped 
to 
be 
able 
to 
co-operate 
with 
the 
Agency 
in 
establishing 
a 
Model 
Project. 
It 
considered 
that 
training 
was 
very 
important 
and 
was 
therefore 
organizing 
training 
programmes 
in 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
for 
the 
benefit 
of 
African 
and 
Arab 
countries. 
It 
was 
grateful 
to 
the 
Agency 
for 
the 
activities 
it 
was 
carrying 
out 
under 
AFRA, 
and 
called 
on 
Member 
States 
to 
continue 
supporting 
technical 
co-operation 
projects. 


50. 
Mr. 
BOERSNER 
STEDER 
(Venezuela) 
commended 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
the 
entire 
Secretariat 
on 
their 
excellent 
work, 
presented 
in 
document 
GC(40)/8 
and 
skilfully 
summarized 
by 
the 
Director 
General 
in 
his 
introductory 
statement. 
He 
endorsed 
what 
the 
Director 
General 
had 
said 
about 
the 
constant 
renewal 
and 
reorientation 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
activities 
and 
the 
crucial 
importance 
of 
human 
development. 
He 
also 
fully 
agreed 
with 
the 
need 
to 
strive 
for 
maximum 
administrative 
efficiency 
and 
wider 
and 
more 
democratic 
participation 
by 
all 
Governments. 
The 
Director 
General 
had 
been 
right 
in 
pointing 
out 
that 
co-operation 
among 
developing 
countries 
had 
increased 
in 
1995-96. 
51. 
In 
the 
year 
since 
the 
39th 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference 
there 
had 
been 
many 
important 
events 
in 
the 
field 
of 
atomic 
energy. 
Venezuela 
had 
followed 
with 
great 
interest 
the 
progress 
of 
the 
Geneva 
negotiations 
on 
a 
comprehensive 
nuclear-test-ban 
treaty. 
While 
regretting 
that 
a 
consensus 
had 
not 
yet 
been 
achieved 
on 
the 
text, 
he 
hoped 
that 
the 
parties 
concerned 
would 
do 
their 
best 
to 
bring 
their 
positions 
closer 
together 
in 
order 
that 
the 
treaty 
could 
be 
signed 
as 
speedily 
as 
possible. 
That 
instrument, 
which 
should 
be 
both 
effective 
and 
attract 
wide 
participation, 
was 
a 
further 
step 
towards 
a 
world 
free 
of 
nuclear 
weapons. 
52. 
Having 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
the 
process 
of 
consolidation 
of 
the 
Tlatelolco 
Treaty, 
he 
pledged 
Venezuela’s 
support 
and 
co-operation 
for 
development 
of 
the 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
for 
peaceful 
purposes 
in 
the 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone 
of 
Latin 
America 
and 
the 
Caribbean 
in 
the 
interests 
of 
the 
people 
of 
the 
region. 
53. 
Venezuela 
congratulated 
the 
African 
countries 
on 
having 
established 
a 
nuclear-
weapon-free 
zone 
under 
the 
Pelindaba 
Treaty, 
and 
also 
the 
States 
of 
South-East 
Asia 
on 
the 
signing 
of 
the 
Bangkok 
Treaty 
to 
establish 
another 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. 
It 
hoped 
that 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
20 


those 
initiatives 
would 
stimulate 
the 
negotiation 
and 
adoption 
of 
similar 
instruments 
for 
further 
geographic 
zones, 
especially 
in 
the 
Middle 
East 
and 
other 
regions 
where 
there 
was 
political 
tension. 


54. 
For 
the 
Agency 
to 
perform 
more 
effectively 
its 
important 
tasks 
in 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
safeguards 
as 
well 
as 
technical 
assistance 
and 
co-operation, 
there 
was 
a 
need, 
as 
the 
Director 
General 
had 
said 
in 
his 
introductory 
statement, 
for 
increased 
administrative 
effectiveness 
and 
flexibility 
and 
proper 
democratic 
participation 
by 
the 
greatest 
number 
of 
countries 
in 
decision-making 
and 
implementation. 
From 
that 
standpoint, 
amendment 
of 
Article 
VI 
of 
the 
Statute 
was 
extremely 
important. 
55. 
The 
Board 
of 
Governors 
should 
be 
expanded 
to 
allow 
better 
representation 
of 
countries 
from 
all 
the 
geographical 
areas. 
The 
developing 
countries 
would 
be 
better 
able 
to 
fulfil 
their 
obligations 
to 
the 
Agency 
if 
they 
were 
represented 
more 
equitably 
on 
the 
Board. 
Venezuela 
had 
examined 
the 
various 
proposals 
put 
forward 
during 
the 
consultations 
which 
had 
taken 
place 
pursuant 
to 
resolution 
GC(39)/RES/21 
and 
its 
position 
could 
be 
summarized 
as 
follows: 
1. 
The 
Board 
of 
Governors 
should 
be 
enlarged 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
criteria 
ensuring 
democratic 
representation 
of 
the 
various 
geographical 
areas; 
2. 
Any 
increase 
in 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
Board 
should 
not 
affect 
the 
current 
levels 
of 
representation 
of 
the 
various 
areas; 
3. 
Account 
should 
also 
be 
taken 
of 
the 
real 
progress 
achieved 
in 
nuclear 
science 
and 
technology 
by 
certain 
countries 
within 
the 
various 
areas. 
56. 
With 
regard 
to 
personnel 
questions, 
reported 
in 
document 
GOV/2876-GC(40)/18, 
the 
progress 
made 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
representation 
of 
the 
developing 
countries 
and 
of 
women 
on 
the 
Agency’s 
professional 
and 
technical 
staff 
was 
welcome. 
The 
sincere 
efforts 
of 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
the 
Secretariat 
to 
make 
further 
advances 
in 
that 
area 
were 
also 
welcome. 
The 
recruitment 
of 
professional 
staff 
posed 
the 
same 
type 
of 
problem 
as 
that 
encountered 
in 
connection 
with 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors, 
namely, 
how to 
reconcile 
the 
principle 
of 
recruitment 
on 
a 
wide 
basis 
with 
that 
of 
administrative 
and 
technical 
excellence. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
21 


As 
a 
developing 
country 
with 
a 
growing 
number 
of 
highly 
qualified 
specialists 
and 
technical 
staff 
of 
both 
sexes, 
Venezuela 
urged 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
the 
Secretariat 
to 
continue 
their 
efforts 
to 
increase 
further 
the 
proportion 
of 
specialist 
staff 
from 
the 
developing 
regions. 
It 
would 
also 
welcome 
any 
progress 
in 
the 
representation 
of 
women 
in 
the 
Secretariat, 
especially 
women 
from 
the 
developing 
countries. 


57. 
A 
valuable 
aspect 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
activities 
over 
the 
past 
year 
had 
been 
its 
information 
and 
training 
activities. 
Particularly 
worthy 
of 
note 
in 
the 
Latin 
American 
and 
Caribbean 
region 
had 
been 
a 
safeguards 
seminar 
in 
Jamaica 
in 
April 
1996, 
and 
another 
seminar 
on 
atoms 
for 
development 
held 
in 
Mexico 
in 
June. 
58. 
Venezuela 
was 
receiving 
much 
valuable 
technical 
assistance 
from 
the 
Agency 
and 
wished 
to 
make 
a 
greater 
contribution 
through 
its 
own 
professional 
and 
technical 
staff 
to 
the 
implementation 
of 
Agency-supported 
national 
and 
regional 
programmes 
and 
projects. 
It 
was 
currently 
the 
beneficiary 
of 
one 
of 
the 
most 
important 
Model 
Projects 
dealing 
with 
water 
resources, 
entitled 
“Groundwater 
Resources 
in 
the 
Caracas 
Valley”. 
As 
in 
other 
large 
cities 
in 
Latin 
America, 
the 
population 
of 
Venezuela’s 
capital 
city 
had 
risen 
sharply 
over 
the 
years 
and 
every 
year 
during 
the 
dry 
season 
its 
water 
supply 
dropped 
to 
precarious 
levels. 
Although 
extensive 
work 
was 
being 
carried 
out 
to 
increase 
the 
existing 
surface 
water 
supply, 
it 
was 
becoming 
increasingly 
necessary 
to 
draw 
on 
the 
groundwater 
resources. 
The 
work 
carried 
out 
in 
co-operation 
with 
the 
Agency 
was 
producing 
very 
positive 
results 
and 
the 
Caracas 
Valley 
experience 
would 
doubtless 
be 
put 
to 
good 
use 
by 
other 
countries 
in 
the 
Latin 
American 
region 
and 
other 
developing 
regions. 
59. 
Under 
the 
ARCAL 
programme, 
Venezuela 
was 
currently 
taking 
part 
in 
10 
regional 
projects 
on, 
inter 
alia, 
veterinary 
science, 
nuclear 
analytical 
techniques, 
the 
production 
of 
radiopharmaceuticals 
and 
the 
industrial 
application 
of 
nuclear 
techniques. 
The 
regional 
project 
ARCAL 
XVIII 
(RLA/8/018) 
entitled 
“Tracer 
techniques 
in 
dam 
leakage” 
had 
been 
particularly 
useful 
to 
the 
country, 
enabling 
it 
to 
save 
some 
US 
$15 
million 
over 
the 
past 
year. 
In 
addition, 
Venezuela 
was 
implementing 
11 
national 
projects 
in 
co-operation 
with 
the 
Agency, 
principally 
in 
the 
areas 
of 
agriculture, 
stockbreeding, 
medicine, 
pharmaceutical 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
22 


science, 
radiology, 
engineering, 
industry 
and 
environmental 
protection. 
For 
the 
1996-98 
biennium, 
a 
further 
6 
national 
projects 
had 
been 
submitted 
to 
the 
Agency 
for 
approval. 


60. 
In 
conclusion, 
the 
Venezuelan 
delegation 
reaffirmed 
its 
unreserved 
support 
for 
the 
Agency 
in 
its 
efforts 
to 
perform 
its 
safeguards 
and 
technical 
co-operation 
activities 
in 
a 
balanced 
manner. 
It 
was 
very 
appreciative 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
efforts 
to 
strengthen 
and 
intensify 
its 
co-operation 
with 
the 
developing 
countries 
and 
grateful 
to 
the 
Agency 
for 
the 
valuable 
assistance 
it 
was 
giving 
to 
Venezuela 
in 
implementing 
regional 
and 
national 
projects 
of 
great 
social 
and 
economic 
significance. 
Venezuela 
would 
make 
every 
effort 
to 
fulfil 
its 
commitments 
to 
the 
Agency. 
Mr. 
Padolina 
(Philippines) 
took 
the 
Chair. 


61. 
Mr. 
STUB 
(Norway), 
having 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
to 
the 
Agency, 
said 
that 
nuclear 
testing 
placed 
a 
great 
strain 
on 
international 
non-proliferation 
and 
disarmament 
efforts 
and 
represented 
a 
threat 
to 
health 
and 
the 
environment. 
The 
reactions 
to 
the 
nuclear 
tests 
carried 
out 
the 
previous 
year 
had 
clearly 
shown 
that 
world 
opinion 
was 
strongly 
opposed 
to 
their 
continuation. 
62. 
A 
universal 
commitment 
to 
the 
banning 
of 
all 
nuclear 
test 
explosions 
was 
of 
paramount 
importance. 
Norway 
was 
pleased 
therefore 
that 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
had 
overwhelmingly 
supported 
the 
CTBT 
the 
previous 
week. 
It 
was 
disappointed 
that 
a 
few 
countries 
continued 
to 
defy 
world 
opinion 
by 
preventing 
the 
entry 
into 
force 
of 
the 
Treaty 
and 
urged 
them 
to 
join 
in 
the 
common 
ultimate 
aim 
of 
a 
comprehensive 
test 
ban. 
63. 
In 
1995 
the 
General 
Conference 
had 
requested 
the 
Director 
General 
to 
continue 
to 
develop 
measures 
proposed 
under 
Programme 
93+2 
for 
strengthening 
the 
effectiveness 
and 
improving 
the 
efficiency 
of 
the 
safeguards 
system. 
Norway 
strongly 
supported 
that 
work 
and 
welcomed 
the 
Director 
General’s 
report. 
Norway 
called 
on 
all 
States 
to 
co-operate 
with 
the 
Agency 
in 
order 
for 
drafting 
of 
a 
model 
protocol 
to 
be 
completed 
as 
soon 
as 
possible. 
Agency 
safeguards 
could 
promote 
greater 
confidence 
among 
States 
and 
thereby 
contribute 
to 
common 
security. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
23 


64. 
His 
delegation 
welcomed 
the 
Secretariat’s 
initiatives 
to 
combat 
illicit 
trafficking 
in 
nuclear 
materials 
and 
other 
radioactive 
sources 
through 
prevention, 
response, 
training 
and 
the 
exchange 
of 
information. 
Norway 
actively 
supported 
efforts 
to 
strengthen 
physical 
protection, 
accounting 
for 
and 
control 
of 
nuclear 
material, 
and 
border 
controls. 
The 
Agency 
had 
been 
represented 
at 
a 
meeting 
held 
in 
June 
1996 
in 
Norway 
where 
those 
issues 
had 
been 
discussed 
by 
representatives 
of 
the 
nuclear 
safety 
authorities, 
the 
police 
forces 
and 
the 
customs 
departments 
of 
Russia, 
Sweden 
and 
Norway. 
65. 
One 
of 
the 
world’s 
highest 
concentrations 
of 
civilian 
and 
military 
nuclear 
installations 
and 
activities 
was 
located 
just 
across 
the 
Norwegian-Russian 
border. 
Norway 
therefore 
had 
a 
strong 
interest 
in 
safety 
levels 
at 
nuclear 
installations 
and 
in 
the 
safe 
management 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
spent 
fuel. 
His 
Government 
had 
launched 
an 
action 
plan 
in 
1995 
for 
strengthening 
co-operation 
with 
Russia 
and 
other 
countries 
in 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
Some 
$35 
million 
had 
been 
allocated 
for 
that 
purpose 
over 
the 
previous 
two 
years. 
The 
initiative 
was 
well 
under 
way 
and 
Norway 
intended 
to 
maintain 
a 
high 
level 
of 
support 
for 
the 
plan’s 
implementation. 
All 
parties 
involved 
seemed 
to 
appreciate 
that 
a 
further 
development 
of 
that 
co-operation, 
in 
a 
spirit 
of 
openness 
and 
trust, 
was 
in 
the 
interest 
of 
all. 
66. 
A 
major 
part 
of 
the 
Norwegian 
assistance 
programme 
was 
focusing 
on 
safety 
enhancement 
and 
risk 
reduction 
at 
the 
Kola 
nuclear 
power 
plant 
until 
such 
time 
as 
the 
reactors 
could 
be 
shut 
down. 
In 
particular, 
the 
two 
oldest 
of 
the 
four 
reactors 
were 
giving 
rise 
to 
serious 
concern 
in 
northern 
Norway. 
In 
the 
interest 
of 
health 
and 
the 
environment, 
those 
and 
other 
reactors 
that 
could 
not 
achieve 
a 
satisfactory 
safety 
level 
should 
be 
closed 
as 
soon 
as 
possible. 
67. 
In 
her 
statement, 
the 
delegate 
of 
the 
United 
States 
had 
referred 
to 
President 
Clinton’s 
call 
to 
deal 
with 
the 
problems 
inherited 
from 
the 
Cold 
War. 
In 
that 
context, 
one 
of 
the 
most 
promising 
areas 
of 
Norwegian-Russian 
co-operation 
dealt 
with 
the 
environmental 
aspects 
of 
the 
dismantling 
of 
decommissioned 
Russian 
nuclear 
submarines 
from 
the 
Northern 
Fleet. 
Of 
special 
interest 
were 
the 
transport, 
handling 
and 
storage 
of 
spent 
fuel 
from 
those 
submarines. 
Some 
of 
the 
projects 
could 
be 
carried 
out 
jointly 
by 
Norway 
and 
the 
Russian 
Federation. 
For 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
24 


others, 
the 
participation 
of 
third 
parties 
would 
be 
welcome, 
particularly 
as 
they 
were 
a 
legacy 
of 
the 
Cold 
War. 


68. 
The 
Agency 
had 
played 
a 
very 
constructive 
role 
in 
promoting 
nuclear 
safety 
worldwide. 
Norway 
was 
particularly 
pleased 
about 
the 
adoption 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety. 
It 
had 
been 
among 
the 
first 
countries 
to 
sign 
and 
ratify 
the 
Convention, 
which 
would 
enter 
into 
force 
the 
following 
month, 
and 
urged 
those 
which 
had 
not 
yet 
signed 
or 
ratified 
it 
to 
do 
so 
without 
delay. 
69. 
Norway, 
which 
had 
a 
particular 
interest 
in 
the 
safe 
management 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
spent 
fuel, 
was 
taking 
an 
active 
part 
in 
the 
drafting 
of 
a 
radioactive 
waste 
convention. 
The 
aim 
was 
as 
comprehensive 
a 
convention 
as 
possible 
covering 
all 
types 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
spent 
fuel 
in 
the 
civil 
and 
military 
sectors. 
70. 
His 
country 
agreed 
that 
spent 
fuel 
could 
be 
recycled 
and 
should 
not 
per 
se 
be 
regarded 
as 
waste; 
that 
would 
be 
taken 
into 
account 
in 
the 
text. 
The 
draft 
convention 
addressed 
safety 
above 
all. 
The 
risk 
to 
the 
population 
from 
spent 
fuel 
was 
as 
great 
as 
that 
from 
high-level 
waste. 
Thus, 
there 
was 
no 
reason 
to 
exclude 
spent 
fuel 
from 
the 
scope 
of 
the 
convention; 
it 
constituted 
a 
radiation 
hazard 
and 
a 
potential 
source 
of 
contamination 
however 
each 
country 
cared 
to 
define 
it. 
71. 
Norway 
had 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
participants 
at 
the 
Moscow Nuclear 
Safety 
and 
Security 
Summit 
had 
given 
an 
absolute 
priority 
to 
nuclear 
safety. 
On 
the 
other 
hand, 
it 
was 
disappointing 
that 
no 
specific 
reference 
had 
been 
made 
to 
increased 
international 
co-operation 
in 
waste 
management, 
including 
the 
need 
for 
an 
international 
funding 
mechanism. 
72. 
The 
Arctic 
was 
a 
particularly 
vulnerable 
environment. 
Norway 
was 
looking 
forward 
to 
receiving 
in 
1997 
the 
results 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
International 
Arctic 
Seas 
Assessment 
Project 
to 
study 
the 
consequences 
of 
past 
dumping 
by 
the 
Soviet 
Union 
of 
radioactive 
material. 
A 
considerable 
amount 
of 
data 
had 
been 
collected, 
including 
the 
results 
of 
joint 
Norwegian-
Russian 
expeditions. 
It 
appeared 
that 
contamination 
from 
the 
dumped 
material 
was 
extremely 
low 
and 
could 
be 
measured 
only 
in 
the 
immediate 
vicinity 
of 
the 
dumping 
sites. 
There 
were, 
however, 
measurable 
levels 
of 
artificial 
radionuclides 
in 
the 
waters, 
sediments 
and 
biota 
of 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
25 


the 
open 
sea; 
they 
were 
attributable 
to 
fallout 
from 
atmospheric 
nuclear 
tests, 
marine 
transport 
of 
effluents 
from 
European 
reprocessing 
plants, 
especially 
Sellafield, 
marine 
transport 
of 
radionuclides 
from 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident, 
and 
transport 
by 
the 
rivers 
Ob 
and 
Yenisei. 
His 
country 
was 
currently 
working 
with 
the 
Russian 
Federation 
to 
establish 
a 
joint 
surveillance 
and 
monitoring 
programme. 
Norway 
was 
less 
concerned 
about 
the 
waste 
that 
had 
already 
been 
dumped 
than 
by 
spent 
fuel 
and 
radioactive 
waste 
that 
might 
contaminate 
the 
marine 
environment 
in 
future 
unless 
preventive 
action 
were 
taken. 


73. 
In 
order 
to 
increase 
international 
co-operation 
and 
co-ordination 
Norway 
had 
participated 
in 
the 
establishment 
of 
a 
consultative 
mechanism 
for 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
projects 
in 
the 
Russian 
Federation. 
A 
Contact 
Expert 
Group 
had 
now been 
created 
under 
the 
auspices 
of 
the 
Agency 
to 
co-ordinate 
international 
efforts, 
to 
avoid 
duplication, 
to 
stimulate 
the 
development 
of 
realistic 
projects 
by 
the 
Russian 
partners 
and 
in 
general 
to 
increase 
awareness 
of 
co-operation 
possibilities 
with 
Russia 
in 
that 
field. 
The 
first 
meeting 
of 
the 
Group 
had 
been 
held 
in 
Moscow 
in 
March 
and 
a 
second 
meeting 
in 
Vienna 
the 
previous 
week. 
Norway 
would 
encourage 
interested 
parties 
to 
take 
an 
active 
part 
in 
the 
forum. 
74. 
In 
conclusion, 
he 
stressed 
that 
nuclear 
energy 
posed 
many 
risks 
and 
should 
be 
properly 
understood 
and 
managed. 
Norway 
remained 
convinced 
of 
the 
importance 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
work 
and 
its 
capabilities 
with 
regard 
to 
non-proliferation, 
nuclear 
and 
radiation 
safety 
and 
technical 
assistance. 
75. 
Mr. 
HALIM 
(Sudan), 
after 
welcoming 
approval 
of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
for 
Agency 
membership, 
said 
that 
in 
recent 
years 
the 
Agency 
had 
implemented 
numerous 
projects 
in 
the 
Sudan 
in 
such 
areas 
as 
medicine, 
food, 
agriculture, 
zootechnics 
and 
animal 
reproduction. 
It 
had 
also 
co-operated 
with 
Sudan 
in 
other 
areas 
such 
as 
groundwater 
prospecting, 
radiation 
protection, 
environmental 
monitoring, 
equipment 
maintenance 
and 
training 
of 
local 
and 
regional 
personnel. 
It 
was 
vital 
in 
that 
connection 
for 
the 
Agency 
to 
establish 
the 
proper 
balance 
between 
its 
technical 
assistance 
programmes 
and 
its 
safeguards 
programmes. 
It 
was 
time 
to 
implement 
resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/388 
adopted 
by 
the 
General 
Conference 
in 
1981, 
which 
called 
for 
the 
necessary 
measures 
to 
be 
taken 
so 
that 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
26 


technical 
assistance 
was 
funded 
through 
the 
Regular 
Budget 
of 
the 
Agency 
or 
through 
other 
comparably 
predictable 
and 
assured 
resources. 
Provision 
must 
therefore 
be 
made 
for 
a 
greater 
inflow 
of 
funds 
into 
the 
TCF 
so 
that 
the 
Agency 
could 
provide 
the 
developing 
countries 
with 
more 
substantial 
support. 


76. 
To 
strengthen 
the 
effectiveness 
and 
improve 
the 
efficiency 
of 
the 
safeguards 
system, 
it 
was 
essential 
that 
all 
countries 
concerned 
should 
submit 
their 
nuclear 
facilities 
to 
Agency 
safeguards. 
A 
formula 
must 
also 
be 
found 
whereby 
the 
Agency’s 
need 
for 
information 
could 
be 
reconciled 
with 
the 
need 
of 
States 
to 
protect 
their 
legitimate 
rights 
while 
abiding 
by 
their 
constitutional 
obligations. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
Middle 
East 
in 
particular, 
the 
international 
community 
must 
work 
to 
persuade 
Israel 
to 
accede 
to 
the 
NPT 
and 
submit 
its 
nuclear 
installations 
to 
international 
inspection 
so 
that 
the 
Agency 
could 
apply 
safeguards 
to 
all 
countries 
in 
the 
region. 
The 
radioactive 
leaks 
from 
the 
Israeli 
reactor 
at 
Dimona 
were 
an 
evil 
omen 
that 
made 
such 
action 
all 
the 
more 
necessary. 
77. 
Sudan 
was 
proud 
to 
see 
that 
the 
African 
continent 
had 
become 
a 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zone. 
In 
that 
connection, 
the 
extension 
of 
the 
NPT 
for 
an 
indefinite 
period 
could 
have 
served 
as 
a 
guarantee 
for 
the 
subsequent 
conversion 
of 
the 
Middle 
East 
region 
into 
a 
nuclear-
weapon-free 
zone 
had 
not 
Israel 
remained 
beyond 
the 
pale 
of 
international 
legality 
by 
refusing 
to 
accede 
to 
the 
Treaty 
and 
submit 
its 
nuclear 
installations 
to 
the 
safeguards 
system. 
Such 
a 
situation 
demanded 
a 
firm 
stance 
by 
the 
international 
community 
in 
order 
to 
persuade 
Israel 
to 
change 
its 
attitude. 
Sudan 
therefore 
supported 
the 
draft 
resolution 
on 
that 
subject 
submitted 
by 
the 
Arab 
States 
group. 
78. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
amendment 
of 
Article 
VI 
of 
the 
Statute, 
he 
said 
that 
the 
Agency 
had 
been 
invited, 
in 
resolution 
GC(XXV)/RES/389, 
to 
give 
due 
consideration 
to 
the 
request 
of 
developing 
countries, 
particularly 
those 
belonging 
to 
the 
areas 
of 
Africa 
and 
of 
the 
Middle 
East 
and 
South 
Asia, 
for 
an 
increase 
in 
their 
representation 
on 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors. 
Some 
maintained 
that 
an 
enlargement 
of 
the 
composition 
of 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
might 
reduce 
its 
efficiency. 
Sudan, 
for 
its 
part, 
considered 
that 
a 
larger 
Board 
would 
be 
more 
efficient. 
It 
had 
therefore 
co-sponsored 
a 
draft 
resolution 
on 
the 
subject 
in 
the 
hope 
of 
helping 
the 
General 
Conference 
to 
solve 
the 
problem. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
27 


79. 
With 
regard 
to 
document 
GC(40)/11 
on 
the 
composition 
of 
regional 
groups, 
the 
Sudanese 
delegation 
considered 
that 
the 
division 
of 
the 
question 
of 
the 
amendment 
of 
Article 
VI 
into 
two 
parts 
(a) 
and 
(b) 
was 
an 
attempt 
at 
obfuscation. 
The 
two 
issues 
should 
not 
be 
considered 
jointly 
and 
only 
part 
(a) 
should 
be 
retained. 
The 
question 
of 
the 
composition 
of 
regional 
groups 
should 
be 
decided 
by 
the 
groups 
themselves 
inasmuch 
as 
the 
practices 
of 
other 
United 
Nations 
organizations 
showed 
that 
it 
was 
not 
possible 
in 
all 
cases 
to 
take 
geographical 
location 
as 
the 
sole 
criterion; 
instead 
there 
was 
a 
tendency 
to 
take 
political 
and 
other 
identity-related 
factors 
into 
consideration. 
80. 
With 
regard 
to 
personnel 
questions, 
while 
the 
report 
showed 
that 
a 
large 
proportion 
of 
candidates 
from 
developing 
countries 
were 
considered 
to 
be 
highly 
qualified, 
the 
recruitment 
objectives 
were 
far 
from 
being 
attained. 
As 
to 
the 
representation 
of 
women 
in 
the 
Secretariat, 
a 
matter 
to 
which 
Sudan 
gave 
particular 
attention, 
the 
fact 
was 
that 
little 
progress 
had 
been 
made 
despite 
the 
determination 
of 
the 
Secretariat 
and 
the 
Director 
General 
to 
implement 
the 
relevant 
General 
Conference 
resolution. 
That 
was 
a 
situation 
which 
must 
be 
remedied 
at 
all 
costs. 
81. 
Mr. 
PESCI 
BOUREL 
(Argentina) 
said 
that 
his 
Government’s 
firm 
commitment 
to 
the 
international 
community’s 
nuclear 
non-proliferation 
efforts 
had 
been 
clearly 
demonstrated 
in 
previous 
years 
by 
Argentina’s 
agreement 
with 
Brazil 
on 
the 
exclusively 
peaceful 
utilization 
of 
nuclear 
energy, 
by 
the 
Quadripartite 
Agreement, 
Argentina’s 
ratification 
of 
the 
Tlatelolco 
Treaty 
and 
the 
NPT, 
and 
its 
accession 
to 
the 
Nuclear 
Suppliers’ 
Group. 
82. 
Buenos 
Aires 
had 
had 
the 
honour 
of 
hosting 
the 
annual 
plenary 
meeting 
of 
the 
Nuclear 
Suppliers’ 
Group 
in 
April 
1996 
where 
important 
decisions 
aimed 
at 
strengthening 
the 
Group’s 
activities 
had 
been 
taken 
and 
Brazil, 
Ukraine 
and 
the 
Republic 
of 
Korea 
had 
been 
welcomed 
as 
new 
members. 
83. 
Convinced 
that 
States 
should 
fulfil 
their 
obligations 
pursuant 
to 
Article 
IV of 
the 
NPT, 
Argentina 
had 
established 
a 
rigorous 
national 
system 
to 
control 
exports 
of 
nuclear 
material, 
equipment 
and 
technologies, 
and 
was 
also 
an 
active 
participant 
in 
the 
plenary 
meetings 
of 
the 
Zangger 
Committee. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
28 


84. 
His 
Government 
was 
completely 
satisfied 
with 
the 
way 
in 
which 
the 
Common 
Argentine-Brazilian 
System 
of 
Accounting 
and 
Control 
of 
Nuclear 
Materials 
had 
functioned 
over 
the 
previous 
year 
and 
with 
the 
important 
activities, 
linked 
to 
implementation 
of 
the 
Quadripartite 
Agreement 
with 
the 
Agency, 
carried 
out 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
ABACC. 
85. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
exclusively 
peaceful 
utilization 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
at 
the 
national 
level, 
Argentina 
continued 
to 
focus 
on 
support 
for 
national 
economic 
and 
social 
development 
policies 
and 
the 
national 
nuclear 
institutions 
had 
continued 
to 
function 
effectively. 
86. 
Nuclear 
power 
had 
accounted 
for 
13% 
of 
national 
electricity 
production 
and 
the 
load 
factor 
of 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
had 
surpassed 
90%. 
That 
major 
achievement 
was 
due 
to 
the 
high 
quality 
of 
the 
Argentine 
supplies, 
especially 
the 
fuel 
elements 
and 
heavy 
water 
which 
were 
entirely 
produced 
in 
the 
country. 
87. 
The 
National 
Atomic 
Energy 
Commission 
had 
finished 
preparing 
its 
technology 
development 
plan 
for 
the 
next 
decade, 
which 
gave 
priority 
to 
the 
strengthening 
of 
nuclear 
power 
generation, 
the 
production 
of 
fissile 
material, 
social 
applications 
of 
nuclear 
energy, 
and 
activities 
related 
to 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
and 
the 
dismantling 
of 
facilities. 
88. 
Development 
of 
a 
low 
power 
nuclear 
reactor 
had 
continued; 
thermohydraulic 
testing 
had 
been 
conducted 
and 
the 
neutron 
test 
facility 
was 
about 
to 
become 
operational. 
With 
regard 
to 
research 
reactors, 
the 
construction 
of 
the 
third 
Argentine 
reactor 
for 
export 
was 
proceeding 
as 
planned. 
89. 
The 
nuclear 
medicine 
school 
in 
the 
Mendoza 
province 
was 
fully 
operational. 
Its 
up-to-date 
equipment 
included 
a 
positron 
emission 
tomograph 
combined 
with 
a 
cyclotron 
for 
the 
production 
of 
short-lived 
radioisotopes. 
Those 
facilities 
were 
available 
to 
all 
countries 
engaged 
in 
nuclear 
medicine 
activities. 
90. 
Argentina 
attached 
great 
importance 
to 
the 
strengthening 
of 
regulatory 
systems 
for 
radiological 
and 
nuclear 
safety. 
The 
post-graduate 
course 
on 
radiation 
protection 
and 
nuclear 
safety, 
which 
was 
supported 
by 
the 
Agency, 
was 
a 
significant 
contribution 
in 
that 
respect. 
Furthermore, 
the 
national 
nuclear 
regulatory 
organization 
had 
continued 
to 
develop 
standards 
and 
had 
been 
permanently 
monitoring 
two 
operating 
nuclear 
power 
reactors 
and 
one 
under 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
29 


construction, 
two 
research 
accelerators, 
seven 
research 
and 
radioisotope 
production 
reactors 
and 
more 
than 
1500 
centres 
using 
radioactive 
materials 
or 
ionizing 
radiation. 
It 
had 
also 
continued 
to 
meet 
its 
safeguards 
responsibilities 
by 
developing 
remote 
monitoring 
and 
environmental 
monitoring 
systems 
for 
the 
detection 
of 
clandestine 
activities. 


91. 
Those 
were 
but 
a 
few 
examples 
clearly 
illustrating 
that, 
in 
the 
two 
years 
since 
the 
beginning 
of 
its 
restructuring 
process, 
the 
Argentine 
nuclear 
sector 
had 
been 
developing 
its 
specific 
activities 
to 
the 
full 
and 
with 
its 
characteristic 
efficiency. 
92. 
Argentina 
continued 
fully 
to 
support 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
activities 
by 
making 
available 
to 
the 
Agency 
numerous 
scientific 
experts 
and 
by 
training 
an 
increasing 
number 
of 
fellowship 
holders 
of 
different 
nationalities. 
In 
that 
connection, 
he 
reaffirmed 
his 
country’s 
support 
for 
the 
ARCAL 
programme, 
and 
in 
particular 
the 
Secretariat’s 
considerable 
efforts 
in 
recent 
months, 
in 
co-operation 
with 
countries 
of 
the 
region, 
to 
bring 
that 
programme 
up 
to 
date. 
Argentina 
would 
continue 
contributing 
to 
the 
TCF 
as 
in 
the 
past. 
93. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
strengthening 
of 
the 
safeguards 
system, 
Argentina 
had 
begun 
to 
implement 
together 
with 
the 
Secretariat 
the 
Part 
1 
measures 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
in 
its 
nuclear 
facilities. 
The 
negotiations 
on 
Part 
2 
of 
the 
Programme 
should 
be 
brought 
to 
a 
successful 
conclusion 
as 
soon 
as 
possible 
and 
he 
therefore 
urged 
all 
the 
States 
participating 
in 
the 
work 
of 
the 
Committee 
on 
Strengthening 
the 
Effectiveness 
and 
Improving 
the 
Efficiency 
of 
the 
Safeguards 
System 
to 
increase 
their 
efforts 
to 
reach 
a 
constructive 
consensus 
soonest. 
94. 
His 
Government 
attached 
fundamental 
importance 
to 
the 
strengthening 
of 
the 
international 
nuclear 
non-proliferation 
regime 
through 
the 
modernization 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
system 
which 
should 
be 
able 
to 
detect 
undeclared 
activities 
in 
Member 
States. 
For 
that 
modernization 
to 
be 
effective, 
it 
was 
essential 
that 
the 
Agency’s 
new safeguards 
system 
be 
universal 
in 
nature 
and 
therefore 
totally 
independent 
of 
the 
type 
of 
agreement 
which 
countries 
had 
concluded 
with 
the 
Agency. 
95. 
Argentina 
was 
particularly 
pleased 
that 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
was 
due 
to 
enter 
into 
force 
on 
24 
October 
1996. 
His 
Government 
had 
begun 
the 
necessary 
procedures 
in 
the 
National 
Congress 
for 
ratification 
of 
the 
Convention 
and 
he 
hoped 
that 
the 
matter 
would 
be 
settled 
shortly. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
30 


96. 
At 
the 
same 
time, 
Argentina 
continued 
to 
participate 
actively 
in 
the 
expert 
group 
responsible 
for 
drafting 
a 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
It 
welcomed 
the 
results 
achieved 
thus 
far 
and 
hoped 
that 
a 
consensus 
would 
soon 
be 
reached 
on 
the 
outstanding 
issues. 
97. 
His 
Government 
had 
participated 
from 
the 
outset 
in 
the 
work 
of 
the 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage 
and 
hoped 
that 
the 
Committee 
would 
bring 
its 
negotiations 
to 
a 
successful 
conclusion 
by 
the 
end 
of 
the 
year, 
developing 
both 
a 
draft 
protocol 
to 
amend 
the 
Vienna 
Convention 
and 
drafting 
a 
convention 
on 
supplementary 
funding 
which 
was 
truly 
universal 
in 
nature. 
98. 
Finally, 
on 
behalf 
of 
his 
Government, 
he 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new 
member 
of 
the 
Agency. 
He 
commended 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
the 
Secretariat 
as 
a 
whole 
on 
their 
work 
and 
professionalism, 
which 
were 
reflected 
in 
the 
satisfactory 
results 
achieved 
in 
the 
various 
areas 
of 
Agency 
activity. 
99. 
Mr. 
PUCCIO 
HUIDOBRO 
(Chile), 
after 
congratulating 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
on 
obtaining 
approval 
for 
membership 
of 
the 
Agency 
and 
expressing 
his 
gratitude 
to 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
all 
his 
staff, 
stated 
that 
Chile 
had 
recently 
concluded 
an 
NPT 
safeguards 
agreement 
with 
the 
Agency, 
which 
was 
shortly 
to 
enter 
into 
force. 
It 
had 
thus 
discharged 
one 
of 
the 
obligations 
incumbent 
on 
it 
as 
a 
party 
to 
the 
NPT. 
100. 
His 
Government 
had 
strongly 
supported 
the 
resolution 
by 
which 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
had 
approved 
and 
opened 
for 
signature 
the 
CTBT 
and 
welcomed 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
Treaty’s 
secretariat 
would 
have 
its 
seat 
in 
Vienna. 
101. 
More 
specifically, 
where 
the 
Agency’s 
field 
of 
competence 
was 
concerned, 
the 
Government 
of 
Chile 
had 
submitted 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
to 
its 
National 
Congress 
for 
consideration 
and 
was 
optimistic 
that 
ratification 
would 
take 
place 
soon. 
He 
had 
been 
pleased 
to 
learn 
that 
the 
Convention 
was 
shortly 
to 
enter 
into 
force. 
Chile, 
which 
had 
also 
been 
following 
with 
interest 
work 
on 
the 
preparation 
of 
new 
standards 
on 
liability 
for 
nuclear 
damage 
and 
on 
the 
safe 
management 
of 
radioactive 
waste, 
hoped 
that 
those 
efforts 
would 
soon 
lead 
to 
the 
adoption 
and 
entry 
into 
force 
of 
the 
relevant 
international 
instruments. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
31 


102. 
Two 
considerations 
of 
crucial 
importance, 
not 
only 
for 
Chile 
but 
also 
for 
the 
Agency 
and 
Member 
States, 
which 
had 
guided 
his 
country’s 
activities 
were 
the 
strengthening 
of 
instruments 
to 
guarantee 
the 
peaceful 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
and 
the 
strengthening 
of 
technological 
development 
activities. 
Chile 
believed 
that 
the 
peaceful 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
should 
be 
ensured 
by 
effective 
safeguards 
measures, 
and 
it 
was 
for 
that 
reason 
that 
it 
had 
strongly 
supported 
Programme 
93+2, 
to 
which 
it 
attached 
great 
importance. 
His 
country, 
in 
line 
with 
its 
policy 
of 
pacifism, 
would 
continue 
to 
make 
every 
effort 
to 
support 
instruments 
which 
had 
an 
effective 
and 
rational 
contribution 
to 
make 
in 
that 
area. 
103. 
It 
was 
equally 
important 
for 
Chile 
that 
nuclear 
energy 
should 
be 
utilized 
under 
conditions 
which 
guaranteed 
the 
safety 
of 
individuals 
and 
the 
protection 
of 
the 
environment. 
That 
was 
why, 
with 
Agency 
support, 
it 
had 
constructed 
a 
radioactive 
waste 
treatment 
plant 
which 
enabled 
it 
to 
comply 
with 
current 
standards 
at 
reasonable 
cost. 
104. 
He 
welcomed 
initiatives 
for 
the 
utilization 
of 
advanced 
rapid 
communication 
technologies, 
including 
the 
linking 
of 
the 
Secretariat 
and 
Member 
State 
Missions 
through 
the 
Internet. 
He 
hoped 
that 
that 
programme, 
which 
he 
regarded 
as 
successful, 
would 
be 
developed 
further 
in 
the 
future. 
105. 
His 
delegation 
also 
welcomed 
recent 
steps 
taken 
by 
the 
Agency 
to 
strengthen 
its 
technical 
co-operation 
activities. 
The 
setting 
up 
of 
SAGTAC 
by 
the 
Director 
General 
was 
an 
extremely 
important 
initiative, 
and 
Chile 
was 
pleased 
to 
have 
been 
invited 
to 
take 
part 
in 
the 
Group’s 
work. 
106. 
Chile 
attached 
particular 
importance 
to 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
activities 
and 
was 
concerned 
that 
they 
make 
an 
effective 
contribution 
to 
meeting 
the 
real 
needs 
of 
countries, 
and 
also 
that 
the 
expected 
benefits 
of 
the 
projects 
surpass 
those 
offered 
by 
other 
formulas 
in 
the 
same 
time 
and 
at 
the 
same 
cost. 
107. 
Global 
political 
and 
economic 
changes 
over 
the 
past 
few 
years 
had 
meant 
that 
the 
mechanisms 
and 
concepts 
governing 
relations 
between 
Member 
States 
and 
the 
Agency 
in 
the 
context 
of 
technical 
co-operation 
had 
to 
be 
fundamentally 
revised. 
The 
concept 
of 
technical 
co-operation 
now 
implied 
a 
higher 
level 
of 
participation 
and 
commitment 
on 
the 
part 
of 
recipient 
countries, 
with 
greater 
responsibility 
on 
their 
part 
both 
in 
the 
choice 
of 
subjects 
and 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
32 


in 
the 
planning 
and 
execution 
of 
projects, 
thereby 
lightening 
the 
heavy 
and 
costly 
administrative 
burden 
borne 
by 
the 
Agency 
and 
freeing 
funds 
which 
could 
be 
more 
usefully 
employed 
in 
actual 
transfer 
of 
technology 
activities. 
Chile 
was 
not 
arguing 
that 
the 
concept 
of 
technical 
assistance 
should 
be 
abolished, 
rather 
that 
it 
should 
be 
adapted 
to 
today’s 
world 
by 
aiding 
countries 
which 
were 
on 
the 
threshold 
of 
development 
and 
by 
actively 
encouraging 
a 
gradual 
handover 
of 
responsibilities. 


108. 
The 
strengthening 
of 
technical 
co-operation 
was 
a 
concept 
which 
was 
not 
confined 
to 
mere 
financial 
considerations. 
It 
implied 
a 
radical 
change 
of 
attitude 
by 
both 
the 
Agency 
and 
recipient 
countries. 
That 
was 
the 
only 
way 
of 
ensuring 
that 
technical 
co-operation 
projects 
had 
a 
real 
impact 
on 
national 
socio-economic 
development 
programmes. 
On 
that 
basis, 
Chile 
had 
successfully 
carried 
out 
a 
fruit 
fly 
elimination 
programme, 
which 
had 
had 
considerable 
economic 
repercussions 
for 
the 
fruit 
export 
sector. 
109. 
Implementation 
of 
the 
ARCAL 
programme 
had 
enabled 
Chile 
to 
obtain 
an 
overview 
of 
existing 
capabilities, 
and 
to 
establish 
the 
links 
needed 
to 
initiate 
co-operation 
activities 
in 
a 
region 
where 
differences 
in 
levels 
of 
nuclear 
development 
offered 
good 
prospects 
for 
horizontal 
co-operation. 
The 
advisory 
services 
of 
experts 
from 
Latin 
America 
and 
the 
Caribbean 
were 
increasingly 
being 
sought 
by 
countries 
of 
the 
region 
under 
both 
the 
ARCAL 
programme 
and 
the 
Agency’s 
regular 
technical 
co-operation 
programme. 
What 
had 
been 
stated 
in 
regard 
to 
technical 
co-operation 
was 
also 
valid 
for 
the 
ARCAL 
programme. 
Chile 
believed, 
based 
on 
its 
own 
experience, 
that 
projects 
implemented 
under 
the 
ARCAL 
programme 
should 
be 
linked 
to 
the 
country’s 
overall 
economic 
and 
social 
system 
from 
their 
inception. 
110. 
In 
conclusion, 
he 
wished 
the 
General 
Conference 
every 
success, 
particularly 
at 
a 
time 
of 
difficult 
challenges 
demanding 
a 
continued 
search 
for 
co-operation 
and 
consensus. 
111. 
Mr. 
ZENARI 
(Holy 
See) 
recalled 
that 
Pope 
John 
Paul 
II, 
when 
visiting 
the 
United 
Nations 
Headquarters 
in 
New 
York 
in 
October 
1995, 
had 
said 
that 
humanity 
had 
experienced 
uncertainty 
in 
the 
second 
half 
of 
the 
twentieth 
century 
about 
its 
future 
because 
of 
the 
threat 
of 
a 
nuclear 
war 
and 
that, 
although 
that 
danger 
appeared 
to 
have 
receded, 
the 
fear 
remained. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
33 


112. 
Public 
opinion 
was 
also 
to 
some 
extent 
apprehensive 
about 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy, 
a 
concern 
that 
had 
been 
exacerbated 
by 
a 
number 
of 
incidents 
at 
nuclear 
power 
plants, 
including 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident. 
The 
peaceful 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
led 
people 
to 
ask 
why 
some 
scientific 
and 
technical 
developments 
could 
both 
serve 
mankind 
and 
turn 
against 
it 
seriously 
endangering 
the 
environment 
and 
all 
forms 
of 
life. 
Moreover, 
the 
more 
power 
man 
had, 
the 
greater 
his 
individual 
and 
collective 
responsibilities. 
The 
fear 
engendered 
by 
the 
nuclear 
age 
might 
lie 
at 
the 
root 
of 
a 
new 
kind 
of 
behaviour, 
namely 
a 
resolute 
commitment 
by 
man 
to 
respect 
himself, 
others 
and 
creation. 
Faced 
with 
the 
most 
terrible 
and 
most 
universal 
threat 
ever 
known, 
mankind 
was 
becoming 
more 
aware 
of 
its 
responsibilities. 
113. 
The 
Holy 
See 
had 
followed 
with 
close 
interest 
the 
international 
conference 
“One 
Decade 
After 
Chernobyl”, 
held 
in 
April 
1996 
under 
the 
sponsorship 
of 
the 
Agency, 
the 
European 
Commission 
and 
the 
World 
Health 
Organization, 
whose 
aim 
was 
to 
learn 
from 
the 
accident, 
to 
promote 
scientific 
studies 
of 
its 
consequences 
and 
to 
encourage 
the 
adoption 
of 
appropriate 
measures 
for 
those 
whose 
health 
had 
suffered 
or 
who 
were 
facing 
serious 
economic, 
social 
and 
environmental 
hardships. 
114. 
Furthermore 
the 
Holy 
See 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
the 
commitment 
laid 
down 
in 
the 
Moscow 
Nuclear 
Safety 
and 
Security 
Summit 
declaration 
(19-20 
April 
1996) 
to 
give 
an 
absolute 
priority 
to 
safety 
in 
the 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
and 
shared 
the 
conviction 
that 
nuclear 
safety 
had 
to 
prevail 
over 
all 
other 
considerations. 
His 
delegation 
reiterated 
its 
support 
for 
all 
initiatives 
aimed 
at 
fostering 
a 
global 
nuclear 
safety 
culture 
by, 
in 
the 
first 
place, 
elaborating 
conventions, 
safety 
codes 
and 
standards 
for 
nuclear 
installations, 
and 
also 
by 
organizing 
seminars 
and 
symposia 
on 
that 
topic. 
The 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
constituted 
a 
step 
in 
the 
right 
direction. 
115. 
Regarding 
a 
convention 
on 
radioactive 
waste 
management, 
the 
Holy 
See 
hoped 
that 
it 
would 
cover 
not 
only 
radioactive 
waste 
from 
civil, 
but 
also 
from 
military 
activities. 
Continuing 
efforts 
to 
promote 
a 
nuclear 
safety 
culture 
should 
serve 
as 
a 
model 
for 
other 
industrial 
sectors. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
34 


116. 
It 
was 
crucial 
that 
information 
on 
all 
to 
do 
with 
the 
peaceful 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
was 
transparent 
and 
objective. 
Fair 
and 
open 
dialogue 
on 
its 
advantages 
and 
limitations 
as 
well 
as 
on 
better 
ways 
of 
producing 
sufficient 
energy 
was 
also 
necessary. 
117. 
The 
recent 
conference 
on 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident 
had 
shown 
that 
the 
total 
lack 
of 
information 
in 
the 
immediate 
post-accident 
phase 
had 
had 
very 
damaging 
consequences. 
Even 
now, 
the 
local 
population 
in 
the 
regions 
affected 
seemed 
to 
have 
no 
faith 
in 
what 
the 
authorities 
were 
telling 
them. 
The 
lack 
of 
information, 
or 
even 
disinformation, 
had 
probably 
reinforced 
the 
new 
chronic 
environmental 
stress 
syndrome 
identified 
among 
victims. 
In 
that 
respect 
the 
media 
bore 
a 
heavy 
responsibility; 
on 
the 
one 
hand, 
they 
had 
an 
obligation 
to 
provide 
information 
about 
the 
real 
harm 
and 
risks 
involved 
while, 
on 
the 
other, 
it 
was 
their 
duty 
not 
to 
instigate 
unnecessary 
fear. 
118. 
The 
ultimate 
goal 
of 
the 
proposed 
new 
measures 
for 
the 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
system 
was 
increased 
trust 
between 
States. 
That 
would 
certainly 
bring 
about 
benefits 
in 
the 
context 
of 
non-proliferation 
and 
contribute 
towards 
nuclear 
disarmament. 
It 
was 
clear 
that 
some 
of 
the 
new 
measures 
would 
demand 
efforts 
on 
the 
part 
of 
Member 
States, 
which 
would 
have 
to 
surrender 
some 
of 
their 
sovereignty 
to 
the 
Agency. 
It 
was 
to 
be 
hoped 
that 
the 
States 
which 
had 
not 
concluded 
comprehensive 
safeguards 
agreements 
would 
also 
apply 
the 
new measures. 
119. 
The 
Holy 
See 
commended 
the 
Agency 
for 
its 
part 
in 
the 
conclusion 
of 
treaties 
establishing 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones 
in 
Latin 
America 
and 
the 
Caribbean, 
in 
Africa, 
in 
South-East 
Asia 
and 
in 
the 
South 
Pacific 
and 
hoped 
that 
other 
regions 
would 
follow suit. 
120. 
The 
review 
of 
progress, 
limitations 
and 
sometimes 
failures 
in 
human 
activities 
ought 
to 
help 
prevent 
certain 
types 
of 
development 
turning 
against 
mankind. 
In 
his 
address 
to 
the 
General 
Assembly 
in 
October 
1995, 
Pope 
John 
Paul 
II 
had 
recalled 
that 
the 
Creator 
had 
endowed 
human 
beings 
with 
the 
capacity 
for 
wisdom 
and 
virtue 
and 
that 
difficulties 
and 
uncertainties 
could 
be 
overcome 
by 
responsibility 
and 
solidarity. 
In 
that 
context, 
he 
renewed 
the 
Pope’s 
appeal 
made 
on 
the 
occasion 
of 
the 
tenth 
anniversary 
of 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident, 
for 
international 
solidarity 
for 
the 
many 
victims 
of 
the 
accident, 
particularly 
the 
children. 
121. 
Mr. 
van 
EBBENHORST 
TENGBERGEN 
(Netherlands) 
said 
that 
for 
40 
years 
the 
Agency 
had 
been 
working 
ever 
harder 
to 
promote 
and 
ensure 
the 
safe 
use 
of 
nuclear 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
35 


energy 
for 
peaceful 
purposes. 
Its 
activities 
had 
become 
increasingly 
relevant 
from 
the 
environmental 
as 
well 
as 
the 
political 
standpoint 
to 
the 
international 
community. 
He 
congratulated 
the 
Agency 
on 
its 
fortieth 
anniversary 
and 
hoped 
that 
it 
would 
continue 
to 
intensify 
its 
activities 
for 
the 
well-being 
of 
mankind. 
He 
fully 
endorsed 
the 
statement 
made 
by 
the 
delegate 
of 
Ireland 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
European 
Union. 


122. 
At 
the 
time 
of 
the 
39th 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference 
in 
1995, 
the 
NPT 
had 
just 
been 
extended 
with 
the 
adoption 
of 
a 
new 
document 
entitled 
“Principles 
and 
Objectives 
for 
Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation 
and 
Disarmament”, 
reformulating 
the 
agenda 
for 
the 
years 
to 
come. 
It 
had 
been 
clear 
that 
the 
Agency 
would 
have 
an 
important 
role 
to 
play 
in 
that 
process 
and 
that 
there 
was 
much 
to 
be 
done. 
While 
significant 
progress 
had 
already 
been 
made 
the 
work 
was 
by 
no 
means 
complete. 
123. 
The 
conclusion 
of 
the 
CTBT, 
which 
had 
been 
adopted 
the 
previous 
week 
by 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
by 
an 
overwhelming 
majority, 
had 
been 
by 
far 
the 
most 
important 
contribution 
to 
non-proliferation. 
The 
Treaty, 
which 
would 
be 
opened 
for 
signature 
the 
following 
week, 
would 
strengthen 
global 
nuclear 
non-proliferation 
and 
contribute 
to 
nuclear 
disarmament 
in 
the 
spirit 
of 
Article 
VI 
of 
the 
NPT. 
His 
delegation 
called 
on 
all 
States 
to 
accede 
to 
the 
CTBT 
to 
ensure 
its 
earliest 
possible 
entry 
into 
force. 
124. 
The 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
system, 
another 
important 
factor 
in 
nuclear 
non-
proliferation, 
was 
in 
the 
process 
of 
being 
strengthened 
considerably. 
Events 
in 
Iraq 
and 
the 
DPRK 
had 
highlighted 
the 
need 
for 
a 
more 
vigorous 
approach 
to 
verification. 
The 
main 
purpose 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
was 
to 
build 
as 
complete 
a 
picture 
as 
possible 
of 
a 
State’s 
nuclear 
activities, 
facilitating 
the 
detection 
of 
inconsistencies 
and, 
hence, 
of 
undeclared 
nuclear 
activities. 
That 
was 
essential 
for 
strengthening 
international 
peace 
and 
security. 
125. 
Part 
1 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
was 
already 
being 
implemented 
and 
his 
delegation 
was 
looking 
forward 
to 
the 
first 
results. 
The 
Part 
2 
measures, 
which 
required 
complementary 
legal 
authority, 
had 
been 
a 
central 
focus 
of 
the 
Board’s 
activities 
over 
the 
past 
year. 
His 
delegation 
applauded 
the 
Board’s 
decision 
to 
establish 
a 
committee 
to 
develop 
a 
draft 
protocol, 
work 
on 
which 
had 
begun 
in 
July. 
There 
was 
no 
doubt 
that, 
under 
the 
chairmanship 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
36 


of 
Mr. 
Walker, 
the 
committee, 
in 
which 
the 
Netherlands 
would 
continue 
to 
make 
an 
active 
contribution, 
would 
soon 
bring 
its 
work 
to 
a 
successful 
conclusion. 


126. 
Strengthening 
of 
safeguards 
was 
an 
irreversible 
process. 
Negotiations 
with 
a 
view to 
a 
ban 
on 
the 
production 
of 
fissile 
material 
for 
explosive 
purposes 
and 
increased 
safeguarding 
of 
civil 
and 
former 
military 
stockpiles 
of 
fissile 
material 
would 
accelerate 
progress 
and 
help 
make 
the 
safeguards 
system 
as 
comprehensive 
and 
universal 
as 
possible. 
127. 
At 
the 
end 
of 
1995, 
the 
Netherlands 
Minister 
of 
Economic 
Affairs 
had 
presented 
a 
White 
Paper 
on 
energy 
to 
Parliament, 
identifying 
the 
steps 
to 
be 
taken 
to 
achieve 
a 
more 
sustainable 
energy 
economy. 
There 
was 
a 
need 
to 
ensure 
a 
reliable 
long-term 
energy 
supply, 
while 
taking 
into 
account 
the 
climate 
problem. 
The 
main 
goals 
of 
the 
policy 
set 
out 
in 
the 
White 
Paper 
were 
to 
improve 
energy 
efficiency 
by 
a 
third 
in 
the 
following 
25 
years 
and 
raise 
the 
proportion 
of 
renewable 
energy 
sources 
in 
total 
primary 
energy 
consumption 
to 
10% 
by 
the 
year 
2020, 
thus 
stabilising 
CO2 
emissions 
at 
the 
1990 
level. 
Another 
objective 
was 
to 
open 
up 
the 
electricity 
and 
natural 
gas 
markets 
by 
limiting 
the 
role 
of 
the 
State. 
There 
were 
currently 
no 
plans 
for 
a 
reactor. 
However, 
the 
existing 
capability 
and 
expertise 
would 
be 
maintained 
to 
leave 
the 
options 
open 
for 
the 
following 
century. 
128. 
Nuclear 
safety 
was 
a 
top 
priority 
for 
all 
members 
of 
the 
Agency. 
His 
delegation 
welcomed 
the 
forthcoming 
entry 
into 
force 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety. 
The 
Netherlands 
hoped 
to 
be 
able 
to 
participate 
in 
the 
first 
meeting 
of 
the 
Contracting 
Parties 
to 
that 
Convention 
to 
be 
held 
at 
the 
beginning 
of 
1997; 
preparatory 
work 
for 
that 
meeting 
was 
already 
well 
under 
way. 
In 
addition, 
considerable 
efforts 
had 
been 
made 
with 
a 
view to 
developing 
an 
international 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
129. 
The 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage 
had 
made 
good 
progress 
over 
the 
past 
year. 
He 
hoped 
that 
the 
outstanding 
issues 
could 
be 
resolved 
at 
the 
Committee’s 
next 
meeting 
in 
South 
Africa 
and 
that 
a 
diplomatic 
conference 
could 
be 
convened 
in 
1997. 
130. 
All 
those 
developments 
should 
contribute 
to 
the 
global 
safety 
culture, 
which 
was 
essential, 
not 
only 
for 
technical 
reasons, 
but 
also 
to 
maintain 
and 
increase 
public 
confidence 
in 
nuclear 
energy. 
He 
stressed 
the 
need 
for 
constant 
improvement 
and 
updating 
of 
safety 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
37 


standards 
and 
regulations. 
Nuclear 
safety 
was 
an 
ongoing 
process, 
and 
there 
might 
be 
a 
high 
price 
to 
pay 
for 
any 
lack 
of 
vigilance. 


131. 
Technical 
assistance 
to 
developing 
Member 
States 
continued 
to 
be 
a 
main 
activity 
of 
the 
Agency. 
He 
commended 
the 
Secretariat’s 
work 
in 
that 
area 
-carried 
out 
with 
the 
support 
of 
Member 
States 
-which 
undoubtedly 
contributed 
to 
economic 
and 
social 
development. 
The 
Netherlands 
would 
pay 
its 
pledged 
TCF 
contribution 
in 
full 
as 
in 
the 
past. 
132. 
Although 
the 
Secretariat’s 
efforts 
had 
once 
again 
prevented 
a 
crisis, 
the 
Agency’s 
financial 
situation 
remained 
a 
cause 
for 
concern, 
both 
in 
respect 
of 
the 
Regular 
Budget 
and 
the 
extrabudgetary 
funding 
needed 
to 
carry 
out 
the 
Agency’s 
statutory 
tasks. 
It 
was 
regrettable 
that 
so 
many 
Member 
States 
-including 
major 
donors 
-had 
not 
been 
able 
to 
meet 
their 
obligations. 
That 
situation 
could 
not 
continue. 
The 
Agency 
needed 
the 
resources 
to 
which 
it 
was 
entitled 
in 
order 
to 
continue 
its 
mission. 
He 
urged 
all 
Member 
States, 
both 
developed 
and 
developing 
countries, 
to 
pay 
their 
contributions 
in 
full. 
In 
the 
light 
of 
the 
financial 
situation, 
prioritization 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
activities 
was 
essential. 
133. 
In 
conclusion, 
he 
reaffirmed 
his 
country’s 
intention 
to 
co-operate 
fully 
with 
Member 
States 
and 
the 
Secretariat 
to 
attain 
the 
Agency’s 
objectives 
in 
the 
coming 
decades. 
134. 
Mr. 
VAJDA 
(Hungary) 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new 
member 
of 
the 
Agency 
and 
endorsed 
the 
statement 
made 
by 
Ireland 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
European 
Union 
and 
associated 
countries, 
including 
Hungary. 
135. 
One 
year 
previously, 
the 
delegates 
to 
the 
General 
Conference 
had 
expressed 
their 
strong 
belief 
that 
the 
indefinite 
and 
unconditional 
extension 
of 
the 
NPT 
not 
only 
constituted 
a 
major 
step 
towards 
a 
more 
secure 
and 
stable 
world 
but 
also 
paved 
the 
way 
for 
a 
new system 
of 
international 
relations 
and 
for 
verification 
of 
the 
exclusively 
peaceful 
use 
of 
nuclear 
energy. 
136. 
In 
its 
final 
document, 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
had 
urged 
the 
Conference 
on 
Disarmament 
to 
complete 
the 
negotiations 
on 
the 
CTBT 
by 
1996 
at 
the 
latest. 
That 
goal 
had 
been 
met 
and 
the 
Treaty 
was 
open 
for 
signature. 
Hungary 
fully 
supported 
what 
it 
viewed 
as 
a 
very 
important 
document 
and 
looked 
forward 
to 
its 
early 
entry 
into 
force. 
The 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
38 


Treaty 
would 
constitute 
a 
new 
landmark 
in 
the 
process 
of 
freeing 
the 
world 
from 
nuclear 
explosions 
and 
effectively 
preventing 
any 
diversion 
of 
nuclear 
materials 
from 
peaceful 
uses 
into 
weapons-related 
activities. 
Hungary 
hoped 
that 
meaningful 
co-operation 
would 
rapidly 
develop 
between 
the 
Agency 
and 
the 
organization 
for 
implementing 
the 
CTBT 
that 
was 
shortly 
to 
be 
established. 


137. 
The 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
held 
in 
1995 
had 
unanimously 
reaffirmed 
that 
the 
Agency 
was 
the 
competent 
authority 
for 
verifying 
compliance 
with 
the 
safeguards 
agreements. 
From 
the 
outset, 
Hungary 
had 
supported 
the 
Agency’s 
efforts 
to 
develop 
a 
stronger 
safeguards 
system 
better 
able 
to 
detect 
undeclared 
nuclear 
activities. 
Hungary 
was 
implementing 
the 
Part 
1 
measures 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
and 
welcomed 
the 
progress 
made 
in 
the 
drafting 
of 
an 
additional 
protocol. 
It 
was 
to 
be 
hoped 
that 
the 
process 
would 
soon 
be 
completed 
in 
the 
overall 
interest 
of 
the 
nuclear 
non-proliferation 
regime. 
138. 
His 
Government 
had 
consistently 
supported 
the 
measures 
taken 
by 
the 
Agency 
to 
ensure 
full 
implementation 
of 
the 
Security 
Council 
resolutions 
regarding 
Iraq. 
It 
commended 
the 
Agency’s 
rigorous 
implementation 
of 
its 
plan 
for 
the 
ongoing 
monitoring 
and 
verification 
of 
Iraq’s 
compliance 
with 
its 
obligations 
and 
encouraged 
the 
Agency 
to 
adhere 
to 
that 
course. 
139. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
DPRK, 
Hungary 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
team 
had 
been 
allowed 
to 
carry 
out 
certain 
safeguards 
activities. 
The 
provisions 
of 
the 
safeguards 
agreement 
had 
not, 
however, 
been 
fully 
implemented 
and 
Hungary 
called 
on 
the 
DPRK 
to 
co-operate 
with 
the 
Agency 
so 
that 
it 
could 
perform 
all 
the 
required 
activities. 
140. 
Illicit 
trafficking 
in 
nuclear 
materials 
remained 
on 
the 
international 
community’s 
agenda. 
Although 
responsibility 
lay 
primarily 
with 
governments, 
the 
crucial 
importance 
of 
continued 
close 
co-operation 
between 
Member 
States 
and 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
role 
in 
that 
regard 
was 
incontestable. 
The 
Hungarian 
delegation 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
Agency’s 
database 
on 
illicit 
trafficking 
was 
already 
operational. 
Hungary 
had 
already 
provided 
relevant 
information 
and 
encouraged 
the 
States 
concerned 
to 
follow 
suit. 
141. 
Radioactivity 
was 
as 
old 
as 
the 
universe 
but 
it 
was 
not 
until 
its 
discovery 
only 
a 
century 
previously 
that 
the 
nuclear 
age 
had 
been 
ushered 
in. 
While 
radioactivity 
had 
been 
glorified 
during 
the 
first 
50 
years 
of 
the 
nuclear 
saga 
and 
had 
often 
been 
considered 
as 
a 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
39 


panacea, 
it 
was 
now 
viewed 
with 
some 
doubt 
by 
the 
general 
public. 
To 
understand 
why 
that 
initial 
enthusiasm 
had 
turned 
into 
fear 
and 
anxiety, 
one 
had 
only 
to 
call 
to 
mind 
a 
tragic 
anniversary, 
the 
tenth 
anniversary 
of 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident 
which 
had 
seriously 
undermined 
public 
confidence. 
The 
lessons 
of 
the 
past 
should 
serve 
to 
intensify 
efforts 
to 
increase 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
transparency. 
He 
commended 
the 
Agency’s 
work 
in 
that 
regard 
which 
had 
led 
to 
the 
development 
of 
important 
international 
conventions. 


142. 
The 
entry 
into 
force 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
was 
an 
important 
achievement 
resulting 
from 
the 
tireless 
efforts 
of 
Member 
States 
under 
the 
auspices 
of 
the 
Agency. 
The 
Convention 
would 
promote 
transparency, 
safety 
culture 
and 
international 
co-operation 
in 
nuclear 
safety. 
Hungary, 
which 
had 
already 
ratified 
the 
Convention 
in 
1995, 
was 
prepared 
for 
its 
implementation 
and 
looked 
forward 
to 
the 
preparatory 
meeting 
of 
the 
Contracting 
Parties. 
143. 
Hungary 
was 
pleased 
with 
the 
progress 
made 
in 
drafting 
a 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management, 
which 
was 
generating 
much 
public 
interest. 
Implementation 
of 
Hungary’s 
domestic 
waste 
management 
programme 
was 
well 
under 
way. 
By 
the 
end 
of 
the 
year, 
a 
possible 
site 
for 
a 
final 
disposal 
facility 
for 
low-and 
intermediate-level 
waste 
would 
be 
selected 
for 
further 
investigation 
and 
the 
construction 
of 
a 
concrete 
modular 
vault 
interim 
dry 
storage 
facility 
for 
spent 
fuel 
would 
be 
completed. 
144. 
Recent 
developments 
in 
the 
revision 
of 
the 
Vienna 
Convention 
on 
Civil 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage 
were 
promising; 
the 
main 
issues 
had 
been 
clarified 
and 
good 
progress 
had 
been 
made 
in 
drafting 
a 
supplementary 
funding 
convention. 
Hungary 
considered 
that 
supplementary 
funding 
should 
be 
covered 
by 
all 
countries, 
regardless 
of 
whether 
they 
operated 
nuclear 
power 
plants, 
and 
should 
be 
accessible 
to 
all 
victims 
of 
nuclear 
accidents 
without 
discrimination. 
Those 
legal 
instruments 
-together 
with 
the 
separate 
attachment 
for 
States 
that 
were 
not 
parties 
to 
the 
Vienna 
Convention 
or 
the 
Paris 
Convention 
-constituted 
a 
full 
international 
civil 
liability 
regime. 
The 
Hungarian 
delegation 
anticipated 
that 
the 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage 
would 
successfully 
conclude 
its 
activities 
and 
that 
a 
diplomatic 
conference 
would 
take 
place 
the 
following 
year. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
40 


145. 
The 
safety 
of 
all 
nuclear 
energy 
applications 
was 
a 
key 
issue 
in 
Hungary 
and 
was 
one 
of 
the 
main 
objectives 
of 
the 
new 
bill 
on 
atomic 
energy 
before 
the 
Parliament. 
The 
basic 
principles 
of 
the 
bill 
complied 
fully 
with 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
relevant 
international 
agreements, 
as 
well 
as 
the 
recommendations 
and 
directives 
of 
the 
Agency, 
the 
OECD/NEA 
and 
the 
European 
Union. 
The 
bill 
also 
specified 
responsibilities 
for 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
and 
the 
corresponding 
sources 
of 
funding. 
With 
regard 
to 
nuclear 
liability, 
it 
confirmed 
that 
the 
licensee 
was 
liable 
for 
all 
nuclear 
damage 
and 
could 
be 
exempted 
from 
liability 
only 
in 
cases 
specified 
by 
the 
law. 
A 
new 
development 
with 
respect 
to 
the 
nuclear 
energy 
law 
currently 
in 
force 
was 
that 
the 
responsibility 
of 
the 
licensee 
and 
the 
State 
was 
subject 
to 
limits 
consonant 
with 
the 
amounts 
foreseen 
in 
the 
draft 
revised 
Vienna 
Convention. 
146. 
The 
new 
law 
called 
for 
the 
publication 
of 
a 
large 
number 
of 
implementing 
orders 
and 
for 
reform 
of 
the 
entire 
regulatory 
system. 
As 
in 
most 
industrialized 
countries, 
a 
modern 
legal 
basis 
would 
be 
established 
as 
soon 
as 
the 
process 
had 
been 
completed. 
147. 
Safety 
had 
been 
viewed 
as 
an 
overriding 
priority 
since 
the 
commissioning 
of 
the 
Paks 
nuclear 
power 
plant. 
Hungarian 
policy 
was 
based 
on 
a 
commitment 
to 
enhancing 
safety, 
to 
identifying 
factors 
that 
undermined 
safety 
and 
to 
constantly 
improving 
safety 
and 
safety 
culture. 
148. 
In 
accordance 
with 
international 
practice, 
the 
Hungarian 
regulations 
provided 
for 
a 
periodic 
review 
of 
the 
safety 
of 
nuclear 
facilities. 
Such 
a 
review 
was 
currently 
being 
carried 
out 
in 
the 
first 
two 
units 
of 
the 
Paks 
nuclear 
power 
plant. 
A 
comprehensive 
schedule 
of 
safety 
upgrading 
measures 
to 
be 
implemented 
during 
the 
next 
two 
to 
five 
years 
would 
also 
be 
drawn 
up 
in 
the 
context 
of 
the 
review. 
Moreover, 
in 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
extrabudgetary 
programme, 
a 
mission 
would 
be 
organized 
for 
November 
1996 
to 
review and 
assess 
the 
safety 
upgrading 
process 
at 
the 
Paks 
plant. 
Hungary 
was 
strongly 
in 
favour 
of 
the 
continuation 
of 
the 
extrabudgetary 
programme, 
which 
should 
in 
future 
include 
among 
its 
main 
aims 
the 
strengthening 
of 
the 
capability 
of 
national 
regulatory 
bodies. 
149. 
An 
important 
project 
in 
recent 
years 
had 
been 
the 
seismic 
re-evaluation 
of 
the 
Paks 
site. 
It 
had 
received 
support 
from 
the 
Agency 
and 
the 
European 
Union’s 
PHARE 
programme. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
41 


150. 
The 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
programme 
continued 
to 
be 
of 
major 
importance 
to 
Hungary. 
His 
country 
therefore 
strongly 
supported 
the 
new 
initiatives 
developed 
partly 
by 
the 
newly 
established 
SAGTAC: 
fewer 
but 
better 
projects, 
partnership 
in 
development, 
and 
extension 
of 
the 
Model 
Project 
concept. 
Although 
it 
was 
not 
the 
Agency’s 
role 
to 
maintain 
the 
nuclear 
infrastructure 
established 
with 
its 
assistance, 
it 
could 
do 
much 
to 
promote 
international 
co-operation 
with 
the 
national 
institutions 
concerned, 
for 
instance 
through 
an 
extended 
research 
contract 
programme. 
Co-operation 
with 
the 
Agency 
itself 
was 
of 
great 
value 
because 
its 
international 
reputation 
could 
help 
to 
promote 
public 
acceptance 
of 
nuclear 
technology 
in 
all 
countries. 
151. 
As 
Hungary 
had 
for 
years 
been 
a 
beneficiary 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
programme, 
it 
could 
vouch 
for 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
the 
new 
approach 
to 
project 
management, 
for 
example 
in 
the 
implementation 
of 
its 
Model 
Project 
on 
strengthening 
training 
for 
operational 
safety 
at 
the 
Paks 
nuclear 
power 
plant, 
which 
was 
considered 
a 
success 
story. 
152. 
In 
view 
of 
the 
favourable 
results 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
programme, 
his 
Government 
intended 
to 
pay 
a 
voluntary 
contribution 
to 
the 
Agency’s 
TCF 
for 
1997 
in 
an 
amount 
corresponding 
to 
its 
share 
of 
the 
target. 
153. 
The 
nuclear 
saga 
was 
far 
from 
over. 
However, 
society 
should 
develop 
a 
more 
realistic 
approach 
to 
radioactivity. 
To 
that 
end, 
vigorous 
and 
judicious 
action 
should 
be 
taken 
to 
strengthen 
and 
expand 
co-operation. 
However 
plain 
it 
seemed 
that 
radioactivity 
had 
proved 
a 
valuable 
tool 
with 
useful 
applications 
in 
many 
areas 
of 
science, 
technology 
and 
medicine 
and 
that 
nuclear 
energy 
was 
essential 
for 
sustainable 
economic 
development, 
there 
was 
still 
a 
need 
to 
put 
across 
that 
message 
honestly 
and 
frequently 
to 
the 
general 
public. 
Hungary 
was 
determined 
to 
assist 
the 
Agency 
in 
that 
endeavour. 
154. 
Mr. 
WALKER 
(Australia), 
having 
welcomed 
approval 
of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
for 
membership 
of 
the 
Agency, 
said 
that 
the 
series 
of 
decisions 
which 
had 
accompanied 
the 
indefinite 
extension 
of 
the 
NPT 
had 
given 
the 
international 
community 
an 
exacting 
agenda 
for 
further 
promoting 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
and 
non-proliferation. 
The 
Agency, 
which 
was 
responsible 
for 
the 
implementation 
of 
a 
substantial 
share 
of 
that 
agenda, 
had 
made 
good 
progress 
during 
the 
past 
year. 
The 
NPT 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
42 


Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
had 
foreseen 
an 
increased 
role 
for 
the 
Agency 
in 
a 
number 
of 
fields 
related 
to 
nuclear 
non-proliferation, 
including 
the 
strengthening 
of 
safeguards, 
the 
promotion 
of 
technical 
co-operation, 
nuclear 
safety, 
the 
establishment 
of 
new nuclear-
weapon-free 
zones 
and 
efforts 
to 
combat 
illicit 
trafficking 
in 
nuclear 
materials 
and 
technology. 


155. 
Australia 
continued 
to 
support 
strongly 
the 
activities 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Technical 
Co-operation 
and 
valued 
the 
Agency’s 
contribution 
in 
promoting 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
science 
and 
technology. 
The 
maintenance 
of 
Australia’s 
contribution 
to 
the 
TCF 
for 
1997 
was 
a 
significant 
achievement 
given 
that 
the 
Australian 
Government 
had 
had 
to 
make 
drastic 
cuts 
in 
its 
appropriations 
for 
international 
and 
bilateral 
aid 
for 
1996 
and 
1997 
in 
order 
to 
achieve 
its 
fiscal 
reform 
objectives. 
Australia 
remained 
committed 
to 
effective 
multilateral 
aid 
mechanisms 
as 
complementary 
components 
of 
its 
overall 
aid 
policy. 
Future 
Australian 
funding 
would 
be 
guided 
by 
its 
own 
aid 
objectives 
and 
by 
the 
performance 
and 
effectiveness 
of 
aid 
programmes 
and 
institutions. 
156. 
The 
Agency 
was 
well 
placed 
on 
the 
basis 
of 
those 
criteria; 
it 
had 
a 
well 
defined 
and 
worthwhile 
role 
to 
play 
in 
technical 
co-operation. 
To 
ensure 
both 
the 
continued 
success 
of 
its 
technical 
co-operation 
programme 
and 
secure 
funding, 
the 
Agency 
should 
carry 
on 
designing 
programmes 
which 
met 
priority 
needs 
and 
produced 
significant 
development 
impact. 
Australia 
had 
been 
pleased 
to 
be 
able 
to 
contribute, 
through 
its 
participation 
in 
the 
Country 
Programme 
Framework 
(CPF) 
review 
team, 
to 
improvements 
in 
the 
country 
programming 
and 
project 
development 
processes 
of 
the 
Department 
of 
Technical 
Co-operation. 
Subject 
to 
competing 
priorities, 
it 
would 
continue 
to 
co-operate 
in 
that 
manner 
with 
the 
Department 
of 
Technical 
Co-operation. 
The 
Agency 
was 
committed 
to 
reform 
and 
was 
to 
be 
commended 
for 
its 
concerted 
efforts 
to 
improve 
technical 
co-operation 
programming 
and 
evaluation. 
157. 
The 
year 
1997 
would 
mark 
the 
25th 
anniversary 
of 
the 
RCA, 
which 
had 
been 
most 
successful 
in 
developing 
and 
promoting 
nuclear 
science 
and 
technology 
in 
Asia 
and 
the 
Pacific 
region. 
The 
extension 
of 
that 
agreement 
should 
allow 
the 
scientific 
and 
technological 
community 
of 
the 
region 
to 
play 
an 
increasingly 
important 
role. 
Concurrently 
with 
the 
extension 
of 
the 
RCA, 
the 
parties 
had 
undertaken 
a 
review 
of 
the 
management 
arrangements 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
43 


for 
the 
RCA. 
The 
recommendations 
of 
that 
review, 
which 
would 
be 
discussed 
at 
the 
25th 
General 
Conference 
meeting 
of 
the 
RCA 
Member 
States 
to 
be 
held 
during 
the 
week, 
would 
help 
the 
RCA 
meet 
its 
objectives. 
The 
RCA, 
which 
had 
never 
remained 
static, 
was 
always 
striving 
for 
improvements 
in 
order 
to 
deliver 
the 
best 
results 
to 
Member 
States 
in 
the 
most 
efficient, 
effective 
and 
appropriate 
manner. 
The 
use 
of 
TCDC 
and 
the 
proposal 
to 
identify 
regional 
resource 
units 
were 
just 
two 
examples 
of 
the 
strong 
regional 
character 
of 
the 
Agreement 
and 
the 
emphasis 
on 
the 
utilization 
of 
developing 
country 
expertise 
in 
its 
programme 
of 
activities. 


158. 
Australia 
was 
also 
interested 
in 
the 
proposal 
made 
by 
the 
Philippines 
to 
establish 
an 
“ASIATOM”. 
It 
looked 
forward 
to 
detailed 
consultations 
with 
the 
Philippines 
and 
other 
interested 
countries. 
159. 
His 
country 
was 
strongly 
committed 
to 
the 
early 
implementation 
of 
a 
strengthened, 
credible, 
effective 
and 
efficient 
safeguards 
regime, 
which 
was 
vital 
to 
the 
confidence-building 
essential 
for 
national, 
regional 
and 
international 
security. 
It 
was 
firmly 
convinced 
that 
if 
the 
existing 
safeguards 
system 
was 
to 
serve 
Member 
States’ 
security 
interests 
into 
the 
twenty-first 
century 
it 
required 
considerable 
strengthening 
to 
enable 
it 
to 
detect 
undeclared 
activities. 
The 
central 
element 
of 
that 
regime 
would 
be 
the 
model 
protocol 
currently 
being 
negotiated 
by 
the 
legal 
drafting 
committee. 
The 
draft 
model 
protocol 
contained 
in 
document 
GOV/2863 
provided 
a 
reasonable 
and 
realistic 
balance 
between 
the 
interests 
of 
Member 
States 
to 
protect, 
on 
the 
one 
hand, 
their 
security 
through 
a 
strengthened 
safeguards 
system 
and, 
on 
the 
other, 
their 
commercial 
interests. 
It 
would 
be 
erroneous 
for 
States 
to 
view 
that 
as 
a 
contest 
between 
the 
rights 
of 
States 
and 
the 
rights 
of 
the 
Agency 
-the 
Agency 
was 
only 
acting 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
States 
themselves. 
States 
should 
appreciate 
that 
the 
safeguards 
system 
ensured 
their 
national 
security 
above 
all. 
Protection 
of 
their 
commercial 
interests 
should 
not 
jeopardize 
the 
achievement 
of 
their 
national 
security 
objectives. 
If 
the 
common 
objective 
was 
to 
enhance 
national, 
regional 
and 
international 
security 
by 
strengthening 
the 
effectiveness 
and 
improving 
the 
efficiency 
of 
the 
safeguards 
system, 
it 
was 
crucial 
that 
the 
provisions 
of 
the 
draft 
model 
protocol 
not 
be 
diluted 
in 
the 
drafting 
process 
to 
upset 
that 
delicate 
balance. 
As 
one 
of 
the 
world’s 
major 
uranium 
suppliers, 
Australia 
attached 
fundamental 
importance 
to 
an 
effective 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
44 


safeguards 
system 
which 
made 
such 
exports 
possible. 
Such 
a 
system 
was 
also 
essential 
for 
other 
exporters 
of 
nuclear 
material, 
equipment 
and 
technology. 


160. 
He 
thanked 
the 
Secretariat 
for 
its 
energetic, 
imaginative 
and 
constructive 
work 
in 
assisting 
Member 
States 
to 
strengthen 
the 
safeguards 
system 
and 
for 
its 
initiative 
in 
holding 
a 
“Safeguards 
Afternoon” 
on 
18 
September 
to 
discuss 
Programme 
93+2. 
He 
urged 
Member 
States 
with 
sizeable 
nuclear 
industries 
which 
had 
participated 
in 
the 
Programme 
93+2 
trials 
to 
share 
their 
experiences 
with 
the 
other 
members 
of 
the 
Agency 
to 
demonstrate 
how those 
measures 
would 
make 
the 
safeguards 
system 
not 
only 
more 
effective 
but 
also 
more 
efficient. 
161. 
An 
important 
outcome 
of 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
had 
been 
the 
call 
for 
the 
early 
negotiation 
and 
conclusion 
of 
a 
comprehensive 
nuclear-test-ban 
treaty. 
The 
adoption 
by 
an 
overwhelming 
majority 
on 
10 
September 
1996 
of 
a 
draft 
resolution 
introduced 
to 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
by 
Australia, 
with 
the 
co-sponsorship 
of 
127 
United 
Nations 
Member 
States, 
had 
clearly 
demonstrated 
that 
the 
international 
community 
considered 
the 
CTBT 
to 
be 
an 
essential 
step 
towards 
a 
nuclear-weapon-free 
world. 
The 
CTBT 
would 
be 
opened 
for 
signature 
on 
24 
September 
and 
the 
Agency 
would 
have 
a 
central 
role 
in 
ensuring 
that 
the 
important 
progress 
made 
over 
the 
past 
18 
months 
-the 
indefinite 
extension 
of 
the 
NPT 
and 
the 
adoption 
of 
the 
CTBT 
-was 
consolidated. 
162. 
The 
Australian 
Government 
deeply 
appreciated 
the 
assistance 
provided 
by 
the 
Agency’s 
Director 
General 
and 
his 
senior 
staff 
for 
the 
meeting 
in 
August 
1996 
to 
discuss 
verification 
issues 
with 
the 
Canberra 
Commission 
on 
the 
Elimination 
of 
Nuclear 
Weapons. 
It 
considered 
that 
the 
Commission’s 
report 
made 
a 
significant 
contribution 
to 
practical 
efforts 
towards 
nuclear 
disarmament 
and 
would 
transmit 
it 
to 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
and 
to 
the 
Conference 
on 
Disarmament. 
163. 
Other 
non-proliferation 
and 
disarmament 
related 
issues 
directly 
relevant 
to 
the 
Agency’s 
mandate 
had 
gained 
greater 
prominence 
since 
the 
NPT 
Review and 
Extension 
Conference, 
notably 
the 
management 
of 
surplus 
plutonium 
and 
HEU 
from 
dismantled 
weapons, 
and 
the 
proliferation 
threat 
posed 
by 
the 
potential 
for 
illicit 
trafficking 
in 
nuclear 
materials 
and 
technology. 
His 
delegation 
was 
pleased 
that 
the 
G-8 
Moscow Nuclear 
Safety 
and 
Security 
Summit 
in 
April 
had 
addressed 
those 
issues 
in 
some 
detail. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
45 


164. 
Australia 
strongly 
supported 
the 
Agency’s 
role 
in 
implementing 
both 
the 
freeze 
on 
the 
DPRK’s 
nuclear 
programme 
and 
the 
Agreed 
Framework 
in 
order 
to 
find 
a 
permanent 
solution 
to 
the 
DPRK 
nuclear 
issue. 
Although 
pleased 
with 
the 
way 
in 
which 
the 
Agreed 
Framework 
had 
been 
implemented 
to 
date, 
Australia 
was 
concerned 
that 
the 
DPRK 
had 
not 
yet 
allowed 
the 
Agency 
to 
put 
in 
place 
measures 
for 
protecting 
information 
to 
enable 
it 
to 
verify 
in 
due 
course 
the 
correctness 
and 
completeness 
of 
the 
DPRK’s 
initial 
declaration. 
He 
hoped 
that 
those 
matters 
would 
be 
resolved 
without 
delay 
during 
the 
next 
round 
of 
technical 
discussions. 
165. 
The 
1995 
General 
Conference 
had 
adopted 
a 
resolution 
concerning 
the 
resumption 
of 
nuclear 
testing 
by 
some 
States, 
which 
inter 
alia 
called 
on 
those 
States 
to 
monitor 
all 
nuclear 
test 
sites 
scrupulously 
and 
to 
inform 
the 
Agency 
of 
any 
adverse 
impact 
arising 
from 
such 
testing. 
Following 
the 
adoption 
of 
that 
resolution, 
the 
Agency 
had 
overseen 
the 
creation 
of 
an 
International 
Advisory 
Committee 
on 
the 
Study 
of 
the 
Radiological 
Situation 
at 
the 
Atolls 
of 
Mururoa 
and 
Fangataufa. 
In 
document 
GC(40)/INF/4 
the 
Secretariat 
had 
advised 
delegates 
that 
that 
Committee, 
which 
included 
a 
representative 
of 
the 
South 
Pacific 
Forum 
and 
the 
Executive 
Director 
of 
the 
Australian 
Nuclear 
Science 
and 
Technology 
Organization 
(ANSTO), 
had 
commenced 
its 
work 
and 
was 
expected 
to 
report 
to 
the 
Agency 
and 
the 
public 
in 
early 
1998. 
Australia 
welcomed 
the 
support 
and 
assistance 
provided 
to 
the 
Committee 
by 
the 
French 
Government. 
At 
the 
27th 
meeting 
of 
the 
South 
Pacific 
Forum 
in 
Majuro, 
Marshall 
Islands, 
at 
the 
beginning 
of 
September, 
the 
South 
Pacific 
Heads 
of 
Government 
had 
expressed 
appreciation 
for 
the 
co-operation 
given 
to 
the 
project 
thus 
far 
by 
the 
French 
authorities 
and 
had 
noted 
that 
the 
study 
was 
being 
conducted 
in 
line 
with 
the 
aims 
expressed 
by 
the 
Forum 
countries 
in 
the 
August 
1995 
Declaration 
of 
South 
Pacific 
Environment 
Ministers. 
Australia 
also 
welcomed 
the 
Agency’s 
work 
in 
relation 
to 
other 
test 
sites, 
as 
reported 
at 
the 
present 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference 
by 
the 
Director 
General. 
166. 
His 
country 
was 
particularly 
pleased 
that 
the 
United 
States 
of 
America, 
France 
and 
the 
United 
Kingdom 
had 
signed 
the 
protocols 
to 
the 
Rarotonga 
Treaty 
in 
July 
1996. 
It 
was 
also 
pleased 
that 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
would 
enter 
into 
force 
on 
24 
October 
1996 
and 
was 
confident 
that 
the 
Convention 
would 
contribute 
significantly, 
particularly 
through 
its 
peer 
review 
system, 
to 
enhancing 
the 
safety 
of 
the 
nuclear 
industry 
worldwide. 
Australia 
had 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
46 


almost 
completed 
its 
domestic 
ratification 
procedures 
and 
its 
ratification 
instrument 
should 
be 
deposited 
before 
the 
end 
of 
the 
year. 


167. 
Australia 
welcomed 
the 
recent 
endorsement 
by 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
of 
the 
revised 
Regulations 
for 
the 
Safe 
Transport 
of 
Radioactive 
Material 
and 
the 
progress 
made 
in 
the 
elaboration 
of 
a 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
Those 
who 
had 
been 
present 
at 
the 
negotiations 
knew 
that 
all 
participants 
had 
approached 
the 
issues 
in 
an 
open 
and 
constructive 
manner. 
Australia 
was 
particularly 
pleased 
that, 
as 
a 
result 
of 
an 
initiative 
by 
the 
Government 
of 
South 
Africa, 
significant 
efforts 
would 
be 
made 
to 
raise 
consciousness 
about 
safety 
issues 
in 
Africa 
at 
the 
following 
meeting 
of 
experts 
on 
the 
draft 
convention. 
That 
initiative 
should 
help 
broaden 
participation 
in 
the 
negotiations, 
a 
beneficial 
development 
for 
all 
States 
involved 
in 
the 
handling 
of 
radioactive 
waste. 
168. 
His 
country 
was 
pleased 
that 
broad 
agreement 
finally 
seemed 
to 
have 
been 
reached 
on 
a 
new 
supplementary 
funding 
convention 
in 
the 
area 
of 
liability 
for 
nuclear 
damage. 
Although 
some 
details, 
including 
one 
or 
two 
important 
issues 
of 
principle, 
remained 
to 
be 
cleared 
up 
at 
the 
forthcoming 
session 
of 
the 
Standing 
Committee 
on 
Liability 
for 
Nuclear 
Damage 
in 
October, 
he 
hoped 
that 
the 
convention 
would 
be 
adopted 
at 
a 
diplomatic 
conference 
in 
1997. 
169. 
Nuclear 
export 
controls 
were 
an 
essential 
component 
of 
the 
international 
non-
proliferation 
regime 
and 
usefully 
complemented 
the 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
system. 
Such 
controls 
served 
the 
aims 
of 
the 
NPT 
and 
the 
treaties 
on 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones 
by 
helping 
to 
prevent 
the 
proliferation 
of 
nuclear 
weapons 
and 
facilitating 
co-operation 
in 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy. 
170. 
At 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference 
in 
1995, 
the 
parties 
to 
the 
NPT 
had 
adopted 
a 
decision 
on 
“Principles 
and 
Objectives 
for 
Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation 
and 
Disarmament” 
in 
which 
they 
called 
for 
the 
promotion 
of 
transparency 
in 
nuclear-related 
export 
controls 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
dialogue 
and 
co-operation. 
In 
the 
same 
decision, 
they 
also 
called 
for 
preferential 
treatment 
for 
non-nuclear-weapon 
States 
party 
to 
the 
Treaty 
in 
the 
promotion 
of 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy, 
taking 
the 
needs 
of 
developing 
countries 
particularly 
into 
account, 
and 
for 
the 
application 
of 
full-scope 
Agency 
safeguards 
to 
all 
new 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
47 


supply 
arrangements 
for 
nuclear 
material 
and 
technology, 
a 
principle 
that 
Australia 
had 
been 
endeavouring 
for 
some 
years 
to 
have 
officially 
adopted 
by 
the 
parties 
to 
the 
NPT. 
Pursuant 
to 
a 
decision 
adopted 
at 
the 
plenary 
meeting 
of 
the 
Nuclear 
Suppliers’ 
Group 
in 
April 
1996, 
Australia 
was 
co-ordinating 
a 
working 
group 
on 
transparency 
issues 
that 
would 
adopt 
a 
work 
programme 
in 
response 
to 
the 
decision 
of 
the 
NPT 
Review 
and 
Extension 
Conference. 


171. 
Domestically, 
ANSTO 
had 
continued 
to 
play 
a 
significant 
role 
in 
the 
generation 
of 
new 
knowledge 
through 
focused 
research 
and 
the 
delivery 
of 
a 
range 
of 
services 
based 
on 
nuclear 
science 
and 
technology. 
It 
had 
increased 
its 
activities 
in 
such 
areas 
as 
safety 
culture, 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
and 
the 
use 
of 
nuclear 
technology 
to 
solve 
environmental 
problems. 
Much 
of 
ANSTO’s 
scientific 
activity 
was 
conducted 
in 
co-operation 
with 
institutions 
around 
the 
globe. 
The 
Synroc 
programme 
was 
one 
area 
of 
research 
in 
which 
collaborators 
from 
many 
institutions 
were 
involved; 
ANSTO 
was 
currently 
developing 
processes 
that 
would 
allow 
the 
use 
of 
Synroc 
in 
parallel 
with, 
or 
complementary 
to, 
the 
use 
of 
glass 
as 
matrices 
for 
wastes 
arising 
from 
the 
reprocessing 
of 
spent 
fuel 
and 
for 
the 
disposal 
of 
a 
wider 
range 
of 
wastes 
from 
the 
defence 
industry. 
ANSTO 
and 
the 
Australian 
Radiation 
Laboratory 
provided 
the 
Agency 
with 
experts 
in 
a 
number 
of 
areas, 
including 
the 
Mururoa 
study. 
The 
Australian 
Radiation 
Laboratory 
was 
supervising 
the 
clean-up 
and 
decontamination 
of 
radioactive 
sites, 
drawing 
on 
its 
experience 
at 
the 
former 
British 
nuclear 
weapons 
test 
sites 
at 
Maralinga 
in 
South 
Australia. 
172. 
Australia 
was 
strongly 
committed 
to 
the 
Agency 
as 
an 
effective 
organization, 
functioning 
in 
accordance 
with 
its 
Statute 
and 
paying 
particular 
attention 
to 
its 
safeguards 
tasks 
and 
its 
scientific 
and 
technical 
role. 
During 
the 
year 
ahead, 
Australia 
would 
support 
the 
Director 
General 
and 
his 
staff 
in 
completing 
some 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
major 
tasks, 
including 
the 
strengthening 
of 
safeguards, 
continuing 
improvement 
of 
the 
design 
and 
delivery 
of 
technical 
co-operation 
projects, 
promotion 
of 
nuclear 
safety, 
environmental 
monitoring, 
the 
drawing 
up 
of 
sound 
waste 
and 
transportation 
standards, 
and 
the 
management 
of 
fissile 
material 
from 
dismantled 
weapons. 
173. 
In 
1997 
the 
Agency 
would 
celebrate 
its 
40th 
anniversary, 
an 
occasion 
that 
should 
provide 
food 
for 
reflection 
on 
its 
future 
role 
and 
what 
the 
international 
community 
expected 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
48 


from 
it. 
Outstanding 
leadership 
and 
expertise 
had 
enabled 
the 
Agency 
to 
rise 
to 
many 
challenges 
but, 
like 
any 
other 
major 
enterprise, 
it 
must 
continue 
to 
modernize 
its 
working 
methods 
for 
the 
twenty-first 
century 
in 
order 
to 
continue 
to 
meet 
security 
and 
development 
needs 
in 
a 
climate 
of 
increasing 
financial 
stringency. 
In 
doing 
so, 
it 
was 
important 
to 
bear 
in 
mind 
the 
exceptional 
status 
of 
the 
Agency 
within 
the 
family 
of 
international 
organizations 
as 
it 
combined 
the 
day-to-day 
delivery, 
at 
a 
very 
reasonable 
cost, 
of 
regional 
and 
global 
security 
with 
the 
provision 
of 
highly 
sophisticated 
technical 
assistance 
and 
fulfilment 
of 
a 
development 
function 
conducive 
to 
economic 
and 
social 
security. 


174. 
In 
conclusion, 
he 
announced 
that 
his 
country 
would 
pledge 
1.29 
million 
Australian 
dollars 
to 
the 
TCF 
for 
1997, 
a 
sum 
that 
corresponded 
to 
its 
share 
of 
the 
target. 
175. 
Mr. 
KIENER 
(Switzerland), 
speaking 
also 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
delegation 
of 
Liechtenstein, 
welcomed 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new 
member 
and 
thanked 
the 
Agency 
for 
the 
conference 
it 
had 
organized 
on 
the 
occasion 
of 
the 
tenth 
anniversary 
of 
the 
Chernobyl 
accident, 
a 
conference 
which 
had 
enabled 
the 
international 
community 
to 
form 
an 
accurate 
picture 
of 
the 
consequences 
of 
the 
accident 
and 
to 
learn 
lessons 
from 
it 
for 
the 
future. 
176. 
In 
1997 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
was 
to 
devote 
a 
special 
session 
to 
Agenda 
21, 
adopted 
at 
the 
1992 
Earth 
Summit 
in 
Rio 
de 
Janeiro. 
He 
was 
pleased 
to 
note 
that 
the 
Agency 
was 
following 
preparations 
for 
that 
session 
closely, 
and 
was 
planning 
to 
report 
to 
it 
on 
the 
work 
it 
had 
carried 
out, 
particularly 
relating 
to 
the 
comparative 
assessment 
of 
possible 
options 
for 
electricity 
generation. 
177. 
Switzerland 
was 
in 
favour 
of 
a 
global 
non-proliferation 
policy 
based 
on 
international 
treaties 
which 
were 
implemented 
worldwide. 
Efforts 
to 
ensure 
transparency 
would 
not 
suffice 
if 
the 
nuclear 
States 
did 
not 
undertake 
to 
embark 
on 
a 
policy 
of 
substantially 
reducing 
their 
nuclear 
arsenals 
in 
accordance 
with 
the 
spirit 
of 
the 
NPT. 
Switzerland 
also 
hoped 
that 
negotiations 
with 
a 
view 
to 
concluding 
a 
fissile 
material 
“cut-off” 
treaty 
would 
soon 
be 
initiated 
within 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
Conference 
on 
Disarmament. 
It 
welcomed 
the 
adoption 
on 
10 
September 
1996 
by 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly 
of 
the 
CTBT, 
which 
Switzerland 
intended 
to 
sign. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
49 


178. 
His 
country 
strongly 
supported 
Programme 
93+2, 
and 
had 
shown, 
by 
participating 
actively 
in 
trials 
of 
the 
remote 
monitoring 
system 
(RMS), 
that 
that 
system 
met 
the 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
requirements. 
It 
was 
planned 
to 
install 
that 
system 
in 
all 
Swiss 
facilities, 
thus 
enabling 
substantial 
savings 
to 
be 
made. 
179. 
Regarding 
Part 
2 
of 
the 
Programme, 
it 
was 
essential 
to 
be 
clear 
as 
to 
how the 
proposed 
measures 
were 
to 
be 
implemented, 
and 
to 
limit 
the 
list 
of 
equipment 
and 
materials 
placed 
under 
control. 
180. 
In 
addition, 
Switzerland 
supported 
the 
Agency’s 
request 
for 
broader 
access 
to 
information 
and 
facilities. 
However, 
he 
stressed 
that 
all 
nuclear-weapon 
States, 
as 
well 
as 
States 
which 
had 
concluded 
INFCIRC/66-type 
agreements, 
should 
undertake 
not 
only 
to 
provide 
the 
information 
requested 
but 
also 
to 
make 
any 
additional 
commitments 
which 
could 
help 
increase 
the 
effectiveness 
of 
safeguards 
on 
their 
territory. 
181. 
Another 
of 
the 
Agency’s 
tasks 
was 
to 
promote 
the 
peaceful 
uses 
of 
nuclear 
energy. 
Major 
problems 
connected 
with 
world 
population 
growth 
and 
future 
world 
needs 
were 
beginning 
to 
arise, 
as 
shown, 
for 
instance, 
in 
the 
Agency’s 
programmes 
for 
dealing 
with 
water 
shortages. 
If 
those 
problems 
were 
to 
be 
resolved, 
ways 
of 
producing 
power 
would 
have 
to 
be 
found 
which 
were 
economical, 
environment-friendly, 
and 
not 
liable 
to 
exacerbate 
international 
relations. 
Nuclear 
energy 
could 
provide 
interesting 
answers 
to 
those 
questions, 
and, 
to 
prove 
it, 
the 
Agency 
should 
take 
active 
steps 
to 
promote 
new 
technologies 
which 
were 
safe, 
not 
-or 
less 
-conducive 
to 
nuclear 
weapons 
proliferation, 
and 
which 
made 
the 
best 
use 
of 
available 
resources. 
182. 
Some 
research 
was 
being 
carried 
out 
with 
a 
view 
to 
producing 
fuels 
which 
posed 
very 
little 
proliferation 
risk 
and 
were 
able 
to 
be 
used 
in 
current 
reactors. 
Other 
research 
was 
aimed 
at 
developing 
new 
technologies. 
At 
the 
1994 
General 
Conference, 
a 
group 
of 
top-level 
scientists 
had 
met 
to 
consider 
the 
advantages 
of 
a 
reactor 
associated 
with 
an 
accelerator. 
Those 
advantages 
were 
numerous, 
in 
terms 
both 
of 
operational 
safety 
and 
of 
reducing 
proliferation 
risks. 
183. 
As 
could 
be 
seen, 
there 
were 
many 
avenues 
to 
be 
explored, 
and 
those 
who 
supported 
an 
increase 
in 
co-operation 
and 
technical 
assistance 
could 
perhaps 
find 
common 
ground 
with 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
50 


those 
who 
favoured 
strengthening 
of 
safeguards, 
with 
a 
view 
to 
effective 
and 
positive 
collaboration. 


184. 
The 
nuclear 
energy 
situation 
in 
Switzerland 
had 
not 
changed 
much 
in 
the 
course 
of 
the 
past 
year. 
The 
country 
was 
still 
to 
a 
considerable 
extent 
dependent 
on 
nuclear 
energy 
for 
its 
electricity 
supplies 
(39% 
in 
1995). 
At 
the 
political 
level, 
nuclear 
power 
was 
still 
being 
legally 
contested, 
although 
the 
construction 
of 
nuclear 
plants 
had 
been 
suspended 
under 
a 
moratorium 
which 
ran 
until 
the 
year 
2000. 
In 
addition, 
assuming 
a 
lifetime 
of 
40 
years, 
the 
three 
oldest 
reactors 
would 
have 
to 
be 
replaced 
in 
the 
year 
2010. 
For 
the 
time 
being, 
that 
was 
unlikely 
to 
happen 
not 
only 
because 
of 
the 
moratorium 
but 
above 
all 
because 
of 
the 
unfavourable 
political 
climate. 
185. 
To 
ensure 
the 
country’s 
future 
power 
supplies, 
the 
Swiss 
Government 
was 
holding 
talks 
with 
the 
chief 
protagonists 
in 
the 
debate 
on 
energy 
policy. 
The 
future 
of 
nuclear 
energy 
was 
central 
to 
those 
discussions. 
He 
hoped 
that 
a 
solid 
political 
platform 
regarding 
Switzerland’s 
future 
power 
supplies 
would 
emerge. 
186. 
The 
Swiss 
Government 
had 
taken 
some 
important 
decisions 
with 
regard 
to 
radioactive 
waste 
management. 
It 
had 
authorized 
the 
construction 
of 
an 
interim 
waste 
storage 
centre, 
and, 
with 
the 
backing 
of 
the 
safety 
authorities, 
had 
authorized 
continuation 
of 
a 
low-and 
intermediate-level 
waste 
storage 
facility 
construction 
project 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
population 
of 
the 
canton 
concerned 
had 
opposed 
authorization 
of 
a 
final 
repository 
in 
a 
referendum 
organized 
in 
1995. 
The 
next 
stage, 
which 
would 
be 
decisive, 
would 
be 
to 
conduct 
a 
new 
referendum 
asking 
the 
population 
of 
the 
canton 
to 
decide 
for 
or 
against 
the 
construction 
of 
a 
pilot 
gallery. 
The 
management 
of 
low-or 
intermediate-level 
waste 
was 
still, 
as 
in 
the 
past, 
much 
more 
a 
political 
than 
a 
technical 
issue. 
187. 
Switzerland, 
like 
most 
States, 
was 
confronted 
by 
a 
drop 
in 
financial 
resources, 
and 
was 
therefore 
seeking 
possible 
ways 
of 
reducing 
its 
deficit. 
That 
was 
why 
it 
had 
resisted 
when 
the 
Agency 
had 
proposed 
an 
increased 
budget, 
despite 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
increase 
was 
covered 
by 
a 
reappraisal 
of 
over-prudent 
income 
estimates. 
While 
Switzerland 
could 
accept 
the 
proposed 
budget 
for 
1997, 
it 
strongly 
urged 
the 
Director 
General 
to 
ensure 
when 
preparing 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
51 


the 
1998 
budget 
that 
the 
contributions 
of 
Member 
States 
remained 
the 
same 
in 
real 
terms 
as 
in 
1996. 


188. 
On 
22 
August 
1996, 
Switzerland 
had 
ratified 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety; 
he 
welcomed 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
Convention 
was 
to 
enter 
into 
force 
on 
24 
October 
1996, 
since 
it 
would 
strengthen 
the 
nuclear 
safety 
mechanism 
to 
which 
Switzerland 
attached 
great 
importance. 
189. 
The 
progress 
achieved 
on 
drafting 
a 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
was 
also 
welcome. 
The 
negotiation 
process 
was 
currently 
at 
a 
stage 
which 
required 
a 
detailed 
approach, 
and 
the 
forthcoming 
meetings 
would 
enable 
common 
positions 
to 
be 
adopted 
after 
specific 
points 
had 
been 
dealt 
with. 
190. 
In 
that 
connection, 
Switzerland 
considered 
that 
spent 
fuel 
ought 
to 
be 
brought 
within 
the 
scope 
of 
the 
convention, 
provided 
that 
its 
subsequent 
use 
had 
not 
been 
determined 
and 
no 
corresponding 
conversion 
undertaken. 
Although 
the 
negotiation 
process 
might 
seem 
slow, 
the 
quality 
of 
the 
future 
convention 
depended 
on 
it. 
Switzerland 
anticipated 
that 
the 
final 
draft 
of 
the 
convention 
would 
be 
completed 
by 
spring 
1997, 
and 
hoped 
that 
it 
would 
be 
opened 
for 
signature 
at 
the 
41st 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference. 
191. 
Mr. 
HÖGBERG 
(Sweden) 
welcomed 
approval 
of 
the 
Republic 
of 
Moldova 
as 
a 
new 
member 
of 
the 
Agency 
and 
associated 
himself 
with 
the 
statement 
made 
by 
Ireland 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
European 
Union. 
For 
Sweden, 
the 
NPT 
was 
the 
key 
both 
to 
non-proliferation 
and 
nuclear 
disarmament. 
Non-proliferation 
efforts 
alone 
could 
not 
guarantee 
international 
peace 
and 
security; 
they 
had 
to 
be 
supplemented 
by 
verifiable 
disarmament 
measures 
involving 
all 
the 
nuclear-weapon 
States. 
Sweden 
urged 
all 
States 
to 
accede 
to 
the 
NPT 
to 
make 
it 
truly 
universal. 
192. 
His 
country 
welcomed 
the 
adoption 
of 
the 
CTBT 
by 
the 
United 
Nations 
General 
Assembly. 
The 
Treaty 
was 
another 
decisive 
step 
towards 
non-proliferation 
and 
Sweden 
urged 
all 
States 
to 
sign 
it. 
Efforts 
should 
now 
be 
intensified 
towards 
nuclear 
disarmament 
through 
multilateral 
and 
bilateral 
negotiations. 
The 
early 
conclusion 
of 
a 
cut-off 
treaty 
for 
weapons-grade 
fissile 
material 
was 
a 
good 
example 
of 
what 
should 
be 
aimed 
for 
in 
that 
respect. 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
52 


193. 
Although 
encouraged 
by 
the 
increasing 
number 
of 
parties 
to 
the 
NPT 
and 
the 
substantial 
progress 
made 
in 
the 
establishment 
of 
nuclear-weapon-free 
zones, 
Sweden 
remained 
very 
concerned 
that 
certain 
countries 
were 
not 
complying 
with 
their 
safeguards 
obligations. 
It 
strongly 
supported 
all 
efforts 
contributing 
to 
full 
transparency 
with 
regard 
to 
the 
DPRK’s 
nuclear 
programme. 
Sweden 
was 
also 
greatly 
concerned 
that 
Iraq 
had 
tried 
to 
impose 
conditions 
on 
UNSCOM’s 
efforts 
to 
implement 
relevant 
Security 
Council 
resolutions. 
Sweden 
commended 
the 
Agency 
for 
the 
work 
it 
had 
carried 
out 
in 
co-operation 
with 
UNSCOM 
to 
trace 
and 
eliminate 
Iraq’s 
nuclear 
weapons 
potential 
and 
welcomed 
the 
measures 
taken 
to 
ensure 
long-term 
monitoring 
and 
verification. 
194. 
The 
Iraq 
experience 
confirmed 
the 
need 
for 
a 
more 
effective 
safeguards 
system. 
Sweden 
had 
taken 
an 
active 
part 
in 
work 
to 
that 
end, 
including 
the 
initiation 
of 
Programme 
93+2 
for 
strengthening 
the 
Agency’s 
safeguards 
system 
and 
improving 
its 
efficiency. 
It 
welcomed 
the 
progress 
made, 
and 
the 
fact 
that 
work 
now focused 
on 
drafting 
the 
protocol 
required 
to 
give 
the 
Agency 
access 
to 
additional 
information 
and 
locations. 
Sweden 
supported 
the 
strengthening 
measures 
contained 
in 
document 
GOV/2863 
and 
all 
the 
more 
so 
in 
the 
light 
of 
the 
positive 
results 
of 
its 
participation 
in 
field 
trials 
of 
several 
elements 
of 
those 
measures, 
which 
had 
shown 
that 
there 
was 
no 
undesirable 
impact 
on 
the 
normal 
operation 
of 
the 
nuclear 
facilities 
concerned. 
It 
urged 
all 
Member 
States 
to 
co-operate 
in 
a 
constructive 
manner 
so 
that 
the 
committee 
responsible 
for 
drafting 
the 
protocol 
could 
present 
a 
text 
to 
the 
meeting 
of 
the 
Board 
of 
Governors 
in 
December 
1996. 
195. 
Sweden 
welcomed 
the 
fact 
that 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
would 
enter 
into 
force 
on 
24 
October 
and 
urged 
all 
Member 
States, 
especially 
those 
with 
operating 
nuclear 
power 
plants, 
to 
accede 
to 
the 
Convention 
as 
soon 
as 
possible 
to 
ensure 
that 
the 
first 
review 
meeting 
was 
truly 
comprehensive. 
196. 
His 
country 
had 
taken 
note 
of 
the 
valuable 
work 
currently 
being 
carried 
out 
on 
the 
drafting 
of 
a 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
spent 
fuel 
management. 
It 
was 
important 
for 
the 
convention 
to 
have 
the 
broadest 
possible 
scope 
and 
to 
include 
spent 
fuel 
and 
military 
waste. 
The 
General 
Conference 
should 
give 
its 
continued 

GC(40)/OR.4 
page 
53 


support 
to 
the 
work 
of 
the 
expert 
group 
and 
its 
Chairman, 
Mr. 
Baer, 
so 
that 
a 
draft 
could 
be 
submitted 
to 
a 
diplomatic 
conference 
in 
1997. 


197. 
In 
the 
development 
of 
the 
nuclear 
fuel 
cycle 
and 
the 
use 
of 
radioisotopes 
for 
medical, 
industrial, 
and 
other 
purposes, 
Member 
States 
should 
always 
consider 
safety 
and 
environmental 
aspects 
before 
taking 
action. 
The 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety, 
which 
was 
about 
to 
enter 
into 
force, 
and 
the 
convention 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
radioactive 
waste 
and 
on 
the 
safety 
of 
spent 
fuel 
management, 
now 
in 
an 
advanced 
state 
of 
preparation, 
were 
both 
good 
examples 
of 
how 
Member 
States 
were 
endeavouring 
to 
reach 
international 
agreement 
on 
such 
aspects. 
Yet 
another 
example 
was 
the 
new 
Basic 
Safety 
Standards 
adopted 
in 
1995. 
It 
was 
also 
important 
that 
the 
Agency 
itself 
comply 
with 
its 
Statute 
and 
apply 
those 
environmental 
standards 
to 
its 
own 
activities, 
in 
particular 
within 
its 
technical 
co-operation 
programme. 
Within 
the 
joint 
IAEA/NEA 
Uranium 
Group 
more 
attention 
should 
be 
paid 
to 
the 
safety 
and 
environmental 
problems 
associated 
with 
uranium 
mining, 
in 
line 
with 
the 
Agency’s 
commitment 
to 
contribute 
to 
sustainable 
development. 
198. 
Sweden 
would 
pledge 
its 
full 
share 
of 
the 
TCF 
target 
for 
1997 
in 
recognition 
of 
the 
importance 
it 
attached 
to 
the 
Agency’s 
technical 
co-operation 
activities. 
It 
supported 
and 
appreciated 
the 
Agency’s 
efforts 
to 
co-ordinate 
its 
activities 
with 
bilateral 
co-operation 
in 
such 
areas 
of 
mutual 
interest 
as 
nuclear 
safety, 
radiation 
protection 
and 
State 
systems 
of 
accounting 
for 
and 
control 
of 
nuclear 
material. 
199. 
With 
regard 
to 
the 
Agency’s 
accounts 
for 
1995, 
he 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
Agency 
had 
acted 
on 
most 
of 
the 
recommendations 
made 
by 
the 
External 
Auditor 
in 
recent 
years. 
He 
commended 
the 
outgoing 
External 
Auditor 
both 
for 
the 
professionalism 
he 
had 
shown 
and 
his 
valuable 
contribution 
to 
the 
effective 
and 
efficient 
performance 
of 
the 
Agency, 
and 
wished 
the 
new 
External 
Auditor 
the 
same 
success. 
The 
meeting 
rose 
at 
7.00 
p.m. 



GC(40)/OR.5 
December 1996 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 18 September 1996, at 10.10 a.m. 


President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 
Item 


of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (continued) 1 -156 

Statements by the delegates and representatives of the 
following States and organizations: 

Germany 1 -10 
Kazakstan 11 -19 
European Commission 20 -35 
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 36 -40 
Tanzania 41 -49 
Spain 50 -70 
Croatia 71 -81 
Slovakia 82 -95 
Tunisia 96 -106 
Denmark 107 -119 
Slovenia 120 -133 
Indonesia 134 -148 
Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and 

Control of Nuclear Materials 149 -156 

[*] GC(40)/22. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96-03359 (XXV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.5 
page 2 

ABACC 

AFRA 

ASEAN 
ASSET 
BSS 

BWR 
Committee 24 

CTBT 
EBRD 
ECU 
EU 
EURATOM 
G-7 
G-24 
ITER-EDA 

Joint Protocol 

KEDO 
LWR 
NPA 
NPP 
NPT 
NPT Review and 
Exte n 

OPEC 
OSART 
Paris Convention 

PHARE 

PWR 
Quadripartite 
Agreement 

Abbreviations 

used 

in 

this 

record 

Brazilian-Argentine AgencyforAccountingand ControlofNuclear 
Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against 
Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 
Boiling-water reactor 
Committee on Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the 
Efficiency of the Safeguards System 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty 
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development 
European currency unit 
European Union 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Group of Seven 
OECD Group of 24 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor -Engineering 
Design Activities 
Joint Protocol Relating to the Application of the Vienna 
Convention and the Paris Convention 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
Light-water reactor 
New Partnership Approach 
Nuclear power plant 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

sion Conference 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear 
Energy (July 1960) 
Poland, Hungary: assistance for economic reconstruction in 
Europe (the programme now covers several East European 
countries) 
Pressurized-water reactor 

Agreement between the Republic of Argentina, the Federative 
Republic of Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting 


RAPAT 

RCA 

SAGTAC 

TACIS 

TCDC 
TCF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNDP 
Vienna Convention 

WHO 
WWER 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 3 

and Control of Nuclear Materials and the International Atomic 
Energy Agency for the Application of Safeguards 
Radiation Protection Advisory Team 

Abbreviations 

used 

in 

this 

record 
(Contd.) 

RegionalCo-operative AgreementforResearch, Developmentand 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Standing Advisory Group on Technical Assistance and 
Co-operation 
Technical Assistance for the Commonwealth of Independent 
States 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
(May 1963) 
World Health Organization 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(40)/OR.5 
page 4 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (continued) 

1. Ms. YZER (Germany) said that her Government was endeavouring to 
pursue an energy policy which conserved resources and protected the environment 
while being economically efficient. In view of the need to reduce the pollution 
associated with fossil energy sources and given the limited potential for energy saving 
and the limited availability of other sources of energy, the use of nuclear energy could 
not be abandoned; it continued to be an important part of the German energy mix, 
currently accounting for approximately 30% of the national electricity supply. 
However, protecting humans and the environment from the hazards of radiation was 
a priority and the highest safety standards should be maintained at nuclear power 
installations. 
2. Having welcomed the high degree of acceptance which the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety had found in the international community, demonstrated by the large 
number of countries which had signed or already ratified the Convention, she said that 
in Germany the parliamentary procedure for ratifying the Convention had begun and 
would probably be completed soon. She was pleased that the Convention would be 
entering into force on 24 October 1996. 
3. Her Government welcomed the activities continuing under the Agency's auspices 
with a view to preparing a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management 
and would actively support all efforts which might contribute to smooth and speedy 
progress. It was her Government's hope that the experts would finalize their work in 
the near future and that a diplomatic conference could be convened soon afterwards 
to decide upon the draft convention. 
4. Germany was continuing to provide assistance, both bilaterally and through 
international programmes, to newly independent States of the former Soviet Union and 
to countries of Central and Eastern Europe. In that connection, she expressed 
appreciation of the contribution which the Agency had made by directly assisting the 
countries in question and by providing overall support. Germany was currently 
concentrating on the operational safety situation at the Rovno and Balakovo NPPs. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 5 

Furthermore, it was continuing to help with the development and strengthening of 
regulatory authorities and the training of nuclear power plant personnel. 

5. The current year was proving to be another decisive year as regards progress 
in the field of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. Together with its European 
and other partners, Germany had worked hard in helping to achieve the conclusion 
of a Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT). With the CTBT's conclusion, the 
participants in the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference were fulfilling one of 
the main obligations enshrined in the document "Principles and Objectives for Nuclear 
Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" adopted at the Conference. Other obligations 
enshrined in that document, such as the early conclusion of negotiations on a "cut-off 
convention", provided an essential frame of reference for future Agency work. 
6. Having expressed her Government's satisfaction with the results of the Moscow 
Nuclear Safety and Security Summit held in April, she welcomed the fact that the 
States participating in the Summit had unanimously supported the current endeavours 
aimed at the safe storage and effective protection of all sensitive nuclear material not 
intended for defence purposes in the nuclear-weapon States. For its part, Germany 
would continue to co-operate in pursuing those goals. 
7. The threat to international peace and security resulting from illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials had by no means been eliminated. At the Moscow Nuclear Safety 
and Security Summit, the participants had adopted a programme for combating illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials and other governments had been called upon to join 
in implementing it. Germany was particularly pleased that Ukraine had expressed its 
support for the programme at the Summit, and it hoped that other States would 
express their support before long. 
8. Turning to financial matters, she said that most Member States were facing 
serious budgetary problems and that the Agency, like other organizations in the United 
Nations system, should give due consideration to that fact. The United Nations 
Secretary-General had recently proposed nominal negative growth for the 1998-99 
budget of the United Nations, but the Agency's programme for 1997, involving an 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 6 

overall budgetary increase of more than 1.8%, was unfortunately not in line with such 
thinking. The German federal budget was to be cut by 2.5%, which would affect 
Germany's voluntary contribution to the Technical Co-operation Fund (TCF) for the 
forthcoming year. 

9. With regard to Programme 93+2, her Government had consistently and 
unequivocally supported it and would continue to do so. Germany had renounced 
nuclear weapons once and for all several decades previously and, with the conclusion 
of the EURATOM Treaty in 1957, had subjected all its nuclear activities to the world's 
first international comprehensive safeguards system. Her country had a particular 
interest in the application of equally effective safeguards throughout the world and 
would support any efforts to make Agency safeguards more effective and efficient. 
Experience had shown that the global effectiveness of Agency safeguards could not be 
strengthened by simply expanding routine measures in countries whose nonproliferation 
credentials were beyond any reasonable doubt. With the ever-increasing 
globalization of both legitimate and illegal activities, with the advent of instant 
transboundary communications, with the international trade in hardware and software, 
and with the mergers and cross-investment now taking place, there was a need for 
improved compilation, cross-checking and analysis of all available information that 
might hint at potentially dangerous activities. Germany therefore believed that the 
contemplated Programme 93+2 measures should be applied universally and was 
pleased that an increasing number of other countries shared that view. It would be 
difficult to understand if certain nuclear-related activities were to become the subject 
of additional reporting requirements and on-site inspections in most countries while 
corresponding activities of equal importance were to be disregarded in the five 
nuclear-weapon States or in other countries that had not yet concluded comprehensive 
safeguards agreements with the Agency. Her country had therefore welcomed the 
statement made by the Governor from the United States at the June session of the 
Board to the effect that the United States, one of the strongest supporters of 
Programme 93+2, did not seek from other countries the acceptance of additional 
measures which it was not ready to accept itself. Such statements and their effective 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 7 

transformation into legally binding commitments would be decisive in securing the 
wide acceptance of new measures designed to strengthen the Agency's safeguards 
system. 

10. Germany had also welcomed the Board's decision to set up the Committee on 
Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards System 
(Committee 24),thusallowingforthoroughexaminationanddiscussionofalltheissues 
involved in defining necessary and effective new measures and in avoiding schemes 
which would be neither rational nor economic. It would continue to co-operate in 
Committee 24 and in the Board of Governors, and it hoped that highly effective 
Programme 93+2 Part 2 measures would be adopted and implemented in all countries 
in which relevant activities were being carried out. 
11. Mr. SHKOL'NIK (Kazakstan), having welcomed the approval of Moldova's 
application for membership of the Agency, said that his country -a relatively new 
Member State -was committed to the principles of nuclear non-proliferation. In the 
1991 Alma Ata Declaration, Kazakstan had announced that it would not seek to 
possess nuclear weapons technology. Accordingly, it had rid itself more than a year 
before of all nuclear weapons deployed on its territory. In 1993 it had acceded to the 
NPT as a non-nuclear-weapon State and two years later had supported the NPT's 
indefinite extension; in 1994 it had concluded a safeguards agreement with the 
Agency, which had entered into force in 1995, and now most of Kazakstan's nuclear 
facilities were under Agency safeguards. 
12. After the break-up of the Soviet Union, Kazakstan had been left with an 
advanced nuclear industry, with large-scale uranium mining and milling enterprises 
and with high-capacity nuclear fuel fabrication plants. Its BN-350 fast reactor, situated 
in Aktau on the shores of the Caspian Sea, was being used not only to produce 
electricity but also to supply fresh water and heat to the region. Kazakstan therefore 
possessed considerable scientific and technical potential in the nuclear power field. 
13. His Government was very concerned about the former nuclear test site near 
Semipalatinsk and was working in close co-operation with the Agency in that 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 8 

connection. Missions had been carried out to investigate the radiological situation at 
the site, and their findings would help in identifying options for eliminating the 
consequences of the many years of nuclear weapons testing. Kazakstan was 
participating in the Agency's technical co-operation programmes and was prepared to 
share its accumulated expertise in the field of sea water desalination with interested 
countries. 

14. His country was actively supporting efforts to strengthen the Agency's 
safeguards system. Programme 93+2 Part 1 measures were being applied at nuclear 
sites under safeguards in Kazakstan, which valued the Agency's role within the nonproliferation 
regime very highly. The protocol additional to comprehensive safeguards 
agreements which was being prepared would undoubtedly make it easier to detect 
any undeclared nuclear activities, which should generally enhance the effectiveness 
and improve the efficiency of the non-proliferation regime. 
15. His country welcomed the steps being taken by the nuclear-weapon States as 
regards placing more and more of their nuclear activities and materials under 
safeguards. 
16. An issue of growing importance was the prevention of illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials and other sources of ionizing radiation. In its export policy, 
Kazakstan observed all the Agency's requirements regarding nuclear exports and 
imports, the relevant principles being reflected in the export control law recently 
adopted in Kazakstan. His country was supporting the Agency's programme to 
strengthen measures against illicit trafficking in nuclear materials. 
17. Kazakstan, which had one power and four research reactors, shared the 
Agency's position regarding nuclear safety matters, and the internal procedures for 
accession to the Convention on Nuclear Safety were near completion. 
18. Radioactive waste management was another problem of concern to his country, 
which, like other countries with developing nuclear industries, was seeking acceptable 
solutions to that problem. Kazakstan needed up-to-date laws and regulations 
governing radiation safety and waste management and an adequate infrastructure. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 9 

His Government therefore welcomed the Agency's interregional Model Projects on 
upgrading radiation protection and waste management infrastructures. 

19. Kazakstan was a keen participant in Agency technical co-operation projects on 
the use of nuclear and isotopic methods in industry, agriculture, medicine, hydrology 
and other areas, and it hoped that such collaboration would increase. It was grateful 
for the assistance which it had received from the Agency and would continue 
supporting the Agency's activities. 
20. Mr. BENAVIDES (EuropeanCommission)saidthat, althoughsomecountries 
in theEuropean Union (EU)werenow importantenergyproducers, theEUasawhole 
was still a net importer of energy, with a total energy self-sufficiency of just over 50%, 
which would probably decline in the future. 
21. The EU was becoming an integrated and more competitive market where 
increased solidarity among the member States was called for in energy matters. In the 
light of that challenge, the Commission had in December 1995 issued a "white paper" 
designed to relaunch the debate on the EU's energy policy. 
22. The EU supported the Secretariat's approach to strengthening safeguards 
through Programme 93+2, in particular the envisaged broader access to information 
and increased physical access to sites of concern. Implementation of Part 1 of 
Programme 93+2wasatanadvancedstage, althoughanumberofimportantquestions 
needed further clarification. It would be necessary at some point to define the role 
which EURATOM should play in the implementation of Part 2 measures. 
23. Safeguards co-operation between the Agency and the European Commission 
would continue. The New Partnership Approach (NPA), with which substantial results 
had already been achieved, represented an effective framework for co-operation 
between the Agency's international safeguards regime and EURATOM's regional 
safeguards inspectorate. The European Commission was sure that, thanks to the NPA, 
the Agency would be able to reduce its inspection effort in the EU countries even 
further. It was also sure that the NPAwould play an important role in connection with 
strengthened Agency safeguards. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 10 

24. The nuclear tests carried out in French Polynesia the previous year had 
prompted a debate on the role of EU institutions with regard to the measures to be 
taken in that connection. The Commission had been pleased to make available 
members of its staff for participation in the Agency's study of the radiological situation 
at the Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls. 
25. Several conferences had been held in various cities, including Vienna, on the 
occasion of the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident. It was to be hoped that 
the many lessons learned from the accident, the more stringent safety measures now 
being taken at the national level, the new spirit of international co-operation in the 
nuclear safety field and the mechanism created by the Convention on Nuclear Safety 
would prevent a reoccurrence of such an event. The fact that a special summit on 
nuclear safety had been held in Moscow in April 1996 confirmed that the issue was 
being followed very closely at the highest political level. The Commission, which had 
actively participated in the preparations for that summit, welcomed its results and was 
involved in the planning of follow-up actions. 
26. The safety of nuclear installations in Central and Eastern Europe and newly 
independent States remained a major concern, and technical assistance in that 
connection would be necessary for some time to come. The EU was still contributing 
significantly through its TACIS and PHARE programmes, and it was involved in the 
appraisal of proposals for safety improvement projects to be partly financed by 
EURATOM loans. The Commission would continue to support the international coordination 
of bilateral and multilateral programmes within the G-24 context. It 
welcomed the fact that many of the countries concerned had acceded to or were 
acceding to the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and hoped 
that those which had not yet passed national legislation for implementation of the 
Convention would do so soon. It also hoped that the work of the Standing Committee 
on Liability for Nuclear Damage would be successfully completed in the near future and 
that a diplomatic conference to revise the Vienna Convention and to adopt the text of 
an additional funding convention could be convened for early in 1997. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 11 

27. Nuclear safety agreements had been negotiated between EURATOM and the 
Russian Federation and between EURATOM and Kazakstan, and it was expected that 
they would be signed that year; the negotiation of a nuclear safety agreement with 
Ukraine was under way. Nuclear co-operation agreements including framework 
provisions on nuclear safety had been concluded with the United States and Argentina. 
28. The EU was contributing to the development of a worldwide nuclear safety 
culture through research programmes carried out in member States as shared-cost 
activities and at its Joint Research Centre and through a continuing search for 
consensus within the EU on safety requirements and optimum safety procedures -a 
search bring conducted with the help of standing advisory groups consisting of experts 
from all nuclear energy sectors. During the year a consensus document on the safety 
of European LWRs had been published as a complement -particularly as regards 
severe accidents -to previous consensus documents entitled "Safety principles for 
LWRs" and "Assurance of safety". 
29. With regard to legislation, the EU Council of Ministers had in May adopted a 
revision of the directive laying down basic safety standards for health protection 
against the dangers of ionizing radiation; the revised directive was consistent with the 
BSS. 
30. The Commission looked forward to the forthcoming entry into force of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety and hoped to resume discussions on EURATOM's 
accession to it. It had been taking part in work -organized by the Agency -on 
drafting the international convention on the safety of radioactive waste management 
called for in the preamble of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and it hoped that the 
outstanding issues would be resolved soon. 
31. With regard to the problem of illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other 
radioactive substances, the EUwas co-operating with the Agency in developing ways 
of detecting radioactive substances at borders. Information on initiatives under way 
in related fields was being exchanged, joint activities were taking place and an 
informal network of contacts had been created. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 12 

32. In the field of research and technological development, various initiatives had 
been taken in 1995 with a view to -inter alia -the closer co-ordination of European 
research efforts. The budget for the 1994-98 EURATOM framework programme 
covering nuclear safety, thermonuclear fusion and the nuclear activities of the Joint 
Research Centre had been increased to ECU 1336 million in order to take account of 
the accession of Austria, Finland and Sweden to the EU. With regard to nuclear safety, 
168 shared-cost projects and 30 concerted actions had been selected in 1995, the 
level of Community funding being ECU 130 million. With regard to controlled 
thermonuclear fusion, the Community's programme of research and training -with the 
focus on magnetic confinement -had been stepped up with a view to the 
establishment of new association contracts, notably with Ireland, Austria and Finland. 
Also, the Commission and Canada had signed a memorandum of understanding on cooperation 
in the field of fusion and an agreement on Canada's involvement in 
EURATOM's contribution to ITER-EDA. 
33. The European Commission and the EURATOM Supply Agency were continuing 
to monitor the uranium market and to ensure a reasonable diversity of uranium supply 
sources;thepatternofsupplyofnaturalandenricheduraniumtousersintheCommunity primarily 
on the basis of multi-year contracts -had remained unchanged. 

34. On 12 April 1996 a new agreement between EURATOM and the United States 
on co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy had entered into force; it 
would, he was sure, strengthen co-operation in nuclear safety, the supply of nuclear 
materials and equipment, research and development, and other fields. On 11 June 
1996, EURATOM and Argentina had concluded an agreement focusing on areas such 
as reactor safety research, nuclear waste management and disposal, radiation 
protection, the decommissioning of nuclear installations, controlled thermonuclear 
fusion, and safeguards. 
35. In March the EU had decided to make an immediate contribution of ECU 5 
million to KEDO, and in April the Commission had proposed that the EU seek 
membership of KEDO and that further contributions be made on the basis of a multi

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 13 

year commitment. Negotiations with KEDO's founding members were expected to open 
in the autumn. 

36. Mr. SELMANI (The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia), having 
welcomed the fact that the Conference had approved the Republic of Moldova for 
membership of the Agency, said it was important to ensure that the mechanisms being 
applied within the United Nations system were as cost-effective as possible and that 
duplication was avoided through effective co-ordination. 
37. Having noted the impressive record of the Agency in furthering the utilization 
of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes through its promotional activities and its 
safeguards, he said that nuclear non-proliferation was in the interests of all countries. 
Also, he welcomed the agreement which had been reached on a Comprehensive 
Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. 
38. Expressing support for the Agency's efforts to raise the safety standards at 
nuclear facilities, he urged those countries which had nuclear power plants at critically 
low safety levels to co-operate with the Agency in implementing enhanced safety 
measures. His country attached great importance to the Agency's work in the areas 
of radiation protection and radioactive waste management and welcomed the 
interregional Model Project on upgrading safety infrastructures to levels commensurate 
with levels of ionizing radiation utilization. 
39. His country had no nuclear power plants, and its co-operation with the Agency 
therefore focused on the practical uses of nuclear energy in medicine, agriculture and 
industry. It appreciated the valuable technical assistance which it had received in 
various areas, including nuclear medicine and personal dosimetry. 
40. His country supported regional co-operation activities and particularly 
appreciatedthe Agency-organizedmeetingsdesigned topromote regionalco-operation 
in Europe. In addition, it would like to participate fully in training programmes 
organized by the Agency and would be interested in organizing training programmes 
itself in areas where it possessed a high level of expertise. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 14 

41. Mr. MAKWETA (Tanzania) said that his country, along with many other 
developing countries (and particularly the least developed among them), had long been 
pleading for a predictable and assured means of financing the Agency's technical cooperation 
programmes, which were the only channel through which developing 
countries could benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The Secretariat used 
the available technical co-operation resources to the greatest advantage of Member 
States, but those resources were neither predictable nor assured. The issue had been 
underdiscussionforyears, andhisdelegationhopedthatSAGTAC-establishedbythe 
Board in 1995 -would address it and perhaps help to stop the steady decline in the 
percentage fulfilment of successive TCF targets. 
42. Tanzania, which was very grateful for the excellent technical assistance it 
received from the Agency, had greatly appreciated the Director General's recent visit 
as proof of the importance attached by the Secretariat to technical co-operation. The 
Agency's large and complex technical co-operation programmes -involving over 1000 
national, regional and interregional projects (more and more of them Model Projects), 
fellowships, training courses and workshops -were extremely valuable. The Model 
Project concept had proved to be important for meeting the real needs of end-users 
and forging closer partnerships between them. 
43. As a result of a Model Project for the total eradication of the tsetse fly using the 
sterile-insect technique on the island of Zanzibar, to which the Director General had 
referred in his statement, the people of Zanzibar could now look forward to living on 
a tsetse-free island. Tanzania was determined to follow up the tsetse eradication 
results obtained on Zanzibar by making the tsetse mass-rearing facility at Tanga established 
with Agency assistance -available to other countries in the region. The 
people of Zanzibar and of Tanzania as a whole were grateful to the Agency and to 
those Member States which had generously supported the Model Project. 
44. The Agency was promoting regional co-operative activities as a means of 
accelerating the transfer of nuclear technology to developing countries. Its support for 
AFRA had generated a firm common resolve among African Member States to 
strengthen institutional co-operation and ensure optimum use of the available 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 15 

resources. For its part, Tanzania intended to continue collaborating with other African 
countries and with the Agency in maintaining the momentum which had been built 
up. 

45. His delegation had noted with appreciation the attention being paid in the 
preparation of the 1997-98 technical co-operation programme to the fundamentals of 
nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and radiation protection, which were 
essential for safe nuclear technology transfer. 
46. Tanzania, which had welcomed the indefinite extension of the NPT and the 
creation of an African nuclear-weapon-free zone, regarded them as two landmarks on 
the long road towards world peace. They should encourage the nuclear-weapon 
States to conclude, as a matter of the highest priority and urgency, "a universal and 
internationally and effectively verifiable comprehensive nuclear test-ban treaty" and 
to step up their efforts to bring about total nuclear disarmament. The nuclear-weapon 
States had an obligation to reciprocate within a reasonable time. 
47. Tanzania, like many other Member States, was concerned about illicit trafficking 
in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources and was following with keen 
interest the steps being taken within the Agency to combat it. For Tanzania, such 
illicit trafficking included the dumping of hazardous radioactive waste in other 
countries in breach of the Basel Convention on the Control and Transboundary 
Movements of Hazardous Wastes and their Disposal -an activity which his country 
thoroughly deplored. 
48. His delegation hoped that the database on illicit trafficking which the Secretariat 
had established would reveal the true magnitude of the problem and that Member 
States would continue co-operating with the Secretariat in its efforts to combat illicit 
trafficking. 
49. For its part, Tanzania would continue to support the Agency's efforts to promote 
the peaceful applications of nuclear techniques and ensure the safe use of nuclear 
technology. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 16 

50. Ms. HUIDOBRO (Spain) said that the 55 444 GWh of electricity produced 
by Spain's nuclear power plants in 1994 had represented 34% of the country's total 
electricity production and that the average load factor of 85.5% (equivalent to 7492 
hours of operation at full capacity) had been among the highest in the world. That 
was the result of extensive operating experience and constant attention to safety and 
reliability, with a high level of investment in operator training and plant overhauling. 
In the latter connection, it might be noted that the replacement of the steam 
generators at the Almaraz and Ascó NPPs, begun in 1995, was continuing and would 
be completed early in 1997. 
51. Because of the low market prices for uranium, the Quercus uranium concentrate 
plant was still operating at reduced capacity, with an annual output of about 300 
tonnes. At the Juzbado fuel element plant, 757 PWR and BWR fuel elements had been 
manufactured in 1995 for use in Spain and for export. 
52. The decommissioning of Vandellós NPP Unit I was due to commence in the near 
future subject to ministerial approval. The first phase, scheduled to last four years, 
would involve the removal of conventional and radioactive components, except for the 
reactor pressure vessel and its internals. After a waiting period of 25 to 30 years final 
decommissioning would be undertaken, the aim being to restore the site to a state 
where it could be used without restrictions. 
53. As regards the management of high-level radioactive waste, the process of 
exchanging the spent fuel racks in NPP storage ponds in order to maximize the latters' 
capacity was nearing completion. As the capacity of the different storage ponds 
became exhausted, metal containers would be used for spent fuel storage. At the same 
time, there were plans to build by the year 2010 a central facility for the medium-term 
storage of all the spent fuel from Spain's power reactors and of the vitrified and other 
long-lived waste that would be returned to Spain after reprocessing of the spent fuel 
from Vandellós NPP Unit I. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 17 

54. The search for a site for deep geological storage, begun in 1986, was 
continuing. At the same time, work was in progress on a conceptual design and on 
the technology for characterizing the selected site and building the facility. 
55. As regards nuclear research and development, Spain's programme was oriented 
towards maintaining a technological capacity sufficient for the needs of the country's 
operating power reactors and for ensuring that the nuclear power option remained 
available. 
56. In the field of energy policy, her Government had decided to introduce greater 
competition into the electricity sector by liberalizing the electricity market. In that 
connection, thought was being given to the arrangements that would apply in the case 
of nuclear power, which -as she had already indicated -accounted for about a third 
of electricity production in Spain. 
57. Turning to Agency matters, she said that her delegation fully endorsed the 
organizational reforms which had taken place in the Secretariat with the establishment 
of a Department of Nuclear Safety. Also, it had followed with interest the review of the 
Agency's nuclear safety-related activities by an international expert group and 
welcomed the fact that the experts' conclusions were reflected in the proposed Agency 
programme for 1997-98. It would like to see similar reviews carried out of the 
Agency's activities relating to radiological protection and radioactive waste 
management. 
58. With regard to the work on drafting a convention on radioactive waste, her 
country, which associated itself with the declaration made by the G-7 at the Moscow 
summit on nuclear safety, was participating actively with a view to the achievement 
of a document that would command a very wide consensus. 
59. As stated on previous occasions, Spain attached high priority to the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety and was pleased that the conditions for its entry into force had now 
been met. It would continue participating actively in the meetings being held in order 
to prepare for the implementation of the Convention. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 18 

60. Her delegation welcomed the reorganization of the Agency's arrangements for 
developing and reviewing safety standards, and experts from Spain were participating 
in the work of the Advisory Commission for Safety Standards, the Radiation Safety 
Standards Advisory Committee and the Waste Safety Standards Advisory Committee 
(WASSAC). As regards the priorities of the standards development programme, Spain 
endorsed the relevant recommendations of the Nuclear Safety Standards Advisory 
Committee and the restructuring proposals made by WASSAC. 
61. Spain would continue collaborating with various other Member States and with 
the Agency itself in advising on matters connected with the planning, establishment 
and restructuring of regulatory organizations. 
62. Spain attached great importance to the efforts being made to improve the safety 
of nuclear power plants built to old Soviet designs, efforts in which Spanish companies 
were participating through projects sponsored by the Agency and the European Union. 
It also attached great importance to the work of the steering committee which was 
advising the Agency on priorities and would continue to press for close co-operation 
through the G-24 with other international organizations. 
63. The success of the Agency conference "One decade after Chernobyl: Summing 
up the consequences of the accident" had demonstrated the significant role played by 
the Agency in promoting exchanges of experience and information on nuclear safety, 
radiological protection and radioactive waste management and had highlighted the 
importance of international co-operation in responding to nuclear emergencies. 
64. Referring to document GC(40)/INF/5, she said that Spain greatly appreciated the 
Agency's OSART, ASSET, RAPAT and other safety-related services and also the 
International Nuclear Event Scale and the Incident Reporting System. In that 
connection, she noted that Spanish engineering firms and institutions were closely 
involved in Agency initiatives directed towards improving the operational safety of 
reactors built to old designs. The benefits derived by Member States from the Agency's 
safety-related services should be assessed from time to time with a view to the 
possible combining of various services 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 19 

65. Concluding her remarks about the Agency's safety-related activities, she said 
that Spain was ready to support the efforts of the Agency directed towards the 
establishment of a "global nuclear safety culture". 
66. Turning to safeguards, she said that Spain, which had welcomed the success 
of the NPT Review and Extension Conference, was pleased with the progress made in 
strengthening the international non-proliferation regime and making it more universal. 
It was also pleased with the progress made in the conclusion of safeguards agreements 
and subsidiary arrangements and looked forward to the early completion of 
negotiations on those which were still outstanding between the Agency and the 
countries in question. 
67. As regards the Tlatelolco Treaty, her country welcomed the progress being made 
towards its full application and hoped that the Treaty would soon enter into force for 
the whole of Latin America. 
68. Aware of the problems faced by the Agency in applying safeguards and of the 
fact that some of those problems resulted from the inadequacy of the financial 
resources assigned to the Department of Safeguards, Spain had not opposed the 
increases requested by the Director General for the Department in the draft budget for 
1997, although the increases would mean a departure from the principle of zero real 
budgetary growth. At the same time, as the increases would not cover all 
requirements it was to be hoped that the gap would be bridged by voluntary 
contributions, especially from those industrialized countries in which the Agency was 
having to make heavy investments in order to safeguard new facilities or fissile 
material removed from the military cycle. 
69. With regard to Programme 93+2, the Spanish delegation looked forward to an 
early and successful conclusion of the discussions taking place in Committee 24. In 
its contributions to those discussions, it was emphasizing two fundamental principles: 
the envisaged new safeguards measures should be compatible with the constitutional 
situation in each country; and those measures should be applied universally and, 
particularly with regard to non-nuclear activities, in a non-discriminatory manner. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 20 

With those principles in mind, the Spanish delegation would continue to participate 
in the quest for a generally acceptable protocol. 

70. As regards the Agency's technical co-operation activities, on which the Spanish 
delegation had commented during the Board's June session, expressing satisfaction 
with the improvements made in terms of volume and quality and making suggestions 
for further improvements, Spain was participating in a variety of ways: despite the 
drastic cuts made in its national budget, it had substantially increased its voluntary 
contributions to the TCF; it was financing a number of footnote-a/ projects; it was 
providing Type II fellowships (64 man-months a year); it was making contributions in 
kind; and it was hosting Agency training courses, bearing all local costs and providing 
teachers. The total value of Spain's contributions in 1995 had been $950 000 -a 
considerable increase on the 1994 figure despite the national budget cuts to which 
she had just referred. 
71. Ms. BEŠKER (Croatia), having welcomed the fact that the Conference had 
approved the Republic of Moldova for membership of the Agency, said that Croatia 
attached great importance to the Agency's role in promoting and verifying the peaceful 
uses ofnuclear energy and was impressed by the Secretariat's constant efforts to adapt 
the activities of the Agency to the changing needs of Member States. 
72. Having welcomed the progress made in the technical co-operation field since 
the General Conference's previous session and having commended the staff of the 
Department of Technical Co-operation and the Department of Research and Isotopes 
in that connection, she said that Croatia was in favour of Model Projects, regional 
projects and TCDC being developed further. 
73. Her country, which would be very interested in increasing its participation in 
regional projects designed for Central and Eastern Europe, hoped to make rapid progress with 
the Agency's help -in bringing its radiation protection regulations and 
arrangements into line with international standards and practices. At the same time, 
Croatian institutions with a long history of nuclear activities were ready to continue 
offering their services to the Agency for events such as the workshop on advanced in



GC(40)/OR.5 
page 21 

service inspection held in Zagreb during the summer. In that connection, she was 
pleased that Croatian expertise was to be drawn upon in implementing technical cooperation 
projects in a number of countries. 

74. With regard to long-term energy planning in Croatia, she said that all available 
energy sources were being assessed in order to determine the most appropriate energy 
mix for the country; the Agency's programme "Comparative Assessment of Energy 
Sources" had been a valuable source of information in that connection. 
75. With regard to the Krško NPP, which was owned jointly by Slovenia and Croatia, 
the construction of a repository for low-and intermediate-level radioactive waste was 
being planned. 
76. Croatia, which had played an active role in the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference, believed that the Conference's decisions should be implemented in their 
entirety; future nuclear security required that all NPT parties should adhere to the 
principles and pursue the objectives adopted by the Conference. 
77. Her country, which had been pleased to support Australia in placing the text of 
the CTBT before the General Assembly, was pleased that the text had received such 
overwhelming support, but it regretted that the Conference on Disarmament had not 
been able to approve it by consensus. Croatia regarded the CTBT as an important step 
towards nuclear disarmament and would be signing and ratifying it in due course. 
78. It was regrettable that, owing to a lack of political will, little progress had been 
made on the issue of a "cut-off" convention. However, her country welcomed the 
conclusion of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty and the South East Asia 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty and would like to see further such treaties being 
concluded for other parts of the world. 
79. In the post-Cold War world, Croatia attached great importance to credible 
Agency safeguards as a key element of the non-proliferation regime and was 
supporting the Programme 93+2 efforts to strengthen the Agency's capability for 
detecting undeclared nuclear activities. It believed that a successful conclusion of the 
current negotiations on a protocol additional to comprehensive safeguards agreements 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 22 

would contribute greatly to the effectiveness and efficiency of safeguards and to global 
security. 

80. Her country welcomed the Agency's efforts to strengthen international cooperation 
in nuclear safety, radiological protection and radioactive waste management; 
it was one of the countries to have already ratified the Convention on Nuclear Safety 
and looked forward to the forthcoming entry into force of the Convention. Also, Croatia 
welcomed the progress made in the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear 
Damage and in the work on drafting a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management. 
81. The success of the Agency's activities depended to a great extent on the 
availability of sufficient and stable funding. Accordingly, despite major financial 
problems, her country was making every effort to pay off its arrears. However, it 
would be grateful if special consideration was given to countries which had only 
recently come into existence, particularly where they had been ravaged by war. 
82. Mr. MIŠÁK (Slovakia), having welcomed the approval of Moldova for 
membership of the Agency, said that the indefinite extension of the NPT had been 
welcomed by Slovakia, which would like all States that were not yet parties to the NPT 
to accede to it as soon as possible. In that connection, Slovakia strongly supported the 
creation of nuclear-weapon-free zones and welcomed the reductions in military 
nuclear potential achieved since the NPT Review and Extension Conference. 
83. Slovakia was pleased that the General Assembly had adopted the CTBT, which 
it would be signing during the current week. 
84. The NPT Review and Extension Conference had reaffirmed that the Agency's 
safeguards system was a fundamentalelement ofthe non-proliferation regime, and his 
delegation had noted with satisfaction that, in fulfilling the safeguards obligations of 
the Agency in 1995, the Secretariat had not found any indication of safeguarded 
nuclear material, facilities or equipment or safeguarded non-nuclear material being 
used for military purposes or for purposes unknown. It was regrettable, however, that 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 23 

the issue of the non-compliance of the DPRK with its safeguards agreement had not 
yet been resolved; the DPRK should comply with that agreement. 

85. Slovakia, which wanted to see the Agency's safeguards system strengthened, 
was already co-operating with the Agency in the implementation of Programme 93+2 
Part 1 measures. It welcomed the progress made in the drafting of a protocol 
regarding Part 2 measures and hoped that the exercise would be completed before the 
end of the year. 
86. His Government, which recognized the importance of effective national 
accounting and physical protection systems in the battle against illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials, had recently taken decisions regarding measures such as radiation 
monitoring at border crossings and increased co-operation among governmental 
agencies within individual countries and among the governments of neighbouring 
countries. 
87. Approximately 50% of Slovakia's electricity was generated at nuclear power 
plants, which were essential for the country's future economic growth. Slovakia's 
primary energy resources were very scarce, while electricity consumption had been 
increasing by approximately 8% annually despite energy saving programmes. Nuclear 
power and hydropower were the most economical options for base load coverage, and 
the targets for the reduction of pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions could be met 
only with their help. Slovakia was therefore pursuing its nuclear power programme, 
with four WWER-440 units in operation at Bohunice and four under construction at 
Mochovce. Two of the Mochovce units were to be commissioned in 1998-99, and a 
governmental decision to complete the other two had been taken. 
88. Slovakia believed that nuclear power was an indispensable energy source. At 
the same time, it believed -in line with the Moscow Nuclear Safety and Security 
Summit declaration -that safety had to prevail over other considerations in nuclear 
power generation, that nuclear safety could be enhanced by greater international 
transparency and that, although nuclear safety was primarily the responsibility of 
individual countries, collaborative efforts in the nuclear safety field must continue. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 24 

89. The tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident had been a poignant reminder 
of the importance of nuclear safety. Recognizing its importance, the Slovak authorities 
had ensured that the country's nuclear power plants were being operated or 
constructed with strong international involvement, which was also resulting in an 
increased transfer of know-how and in greater public confidence regarding the safety 
levels at the operating plants and the compliance of the plants under construction with 
current international standards. 
90. In Slovakia, nuclear power generation was strictly regulated by the country's 
Nuclear Regulatory Authority -an independent public body whose maturity and 
competence had been recognized by the Agency and a number of other organizations. 
Also, Slovakia had recently acceded to the Convention on Nuclear Safety and to the 
Vienna Convention and the Joint Protocol. Furthermore, a State Fund for the 
Decommissioning of Nuclear Power Plants had been established and a peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy bill was at an advanced stage in the approval process. 
91. Slovakia welcomed the forthcoming entry into force of the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety and was satisfied with the progress being made in the run-up to the 
Preparatory Meeting of the Contracting Parties. It trusted that the review meetings 
provided for in the Convention would not be restricted to the reviewing of national 
reports, but would also provide a forum for comprehensive exchanges of experience 
regarding the operation of nuclear facilities. The Agency should play a leading role 
in that regard, and implementation of the Convention should be widely reflected in the 
Agency's activities. Efforts should now be concentrated on successfully completing a 
draft convention on the safety of radioactive waste management. 
92. Slovakia, which had a strong interest in the activities of the Standing Committee 
on Liability for Nuclear Damage, hoped that the Committee would complete its task in 
the near future and that all the proposed amendments to the existing legal instruments 
would take account of the economic realities in the States involved. 
93. Slovakia greatly appreciated the Agency's role in helping to improve the safety 
of its WWERs and to strengthen the nuclear regulatory regime in Slovakia, both 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 25 

through the Regular Budget and with the help of extrabudgetary resources. In return, 
his country would like to make its relevant facilities and expertise available to the 
Agency. 

94. As regards Agency technical assistance, which was important for Slovakia, his 
delegation welcomed the new management approach reflected in the interregional 
projects on radiation protection and waste management infrastructures. In that 
connection, it was particularly pleased that the project co-ordinator's office had 
become operational in Slovakia. The Model Project for strengthening Slovakia's nuclear 
safety regulatory body had already had a significant impact, demonstrated by the fact 
that Slovakia was now sharing its experience with countries such as Armenia and Ukraine a 
contribution to regional self-reliance. 

95. His country had been meeting its Regular Budget assessments in full and paying 
its full TCF target shares, and it would like to see all Member States fulfilling their 
financial obligations vis-à-vis the Agency. 
96. Mr. EL FADHEL KHALIL (Tunisia), having welcomed the approval of 
Moldova formembership ofthe Agency, said that Tunisia's commitment tointernational 
co-operation in all areas of concern to the Agency was evidenced by the fact that it 
had been one of the first States to join the Agency, had concluded an NPT safeguards 
agreement with the Agency, had signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety and had 
been the first country to become an AFRA partner. Also, Tunisia was the host country 
of the Arab Atomic Energy Agency, which was eager to intensify co-operation with its 
international counterpart in Vienna. 
97. Tunisia was supporting the work on drafting a comprehensive legal instrument 
dealing with the management of radioactive waste in view of the need to improve the 
relevant legislative structures in many countries, including Tunisia, and to introduce 
effective international arrangements in that area. 
98. His country attached great importance to technical co-operation in all fields of 
nuclear science and technology in view of the scope it provided for the development 
of local capacities in most areas of economic and social development. It therefore 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 26 

greatlyappreciated the initiatives aimed at enhancing the effectiveness ofthe Agency's 
technical co-operation activities at the country level. In particular, it welcomed the 
introduction of a Country Programme Framework for technical co-operation with 
Tunisia, where the Agency was also supporting a programme of screening for neonatal 
hypothyroidism. 

99. His country, which would be hosting the next meeting of AFRA country 
co-ordinators, greatly appreciated the support for AFRA that was being provided by 
France, the United States and OPEC and would like to see other countries and 
organizations following their example. 
100. Tunisia paid its contributions to the Regular Budget in full and discharged all 
its other financial obligations to the Agency, and it would shortly be paying its full 
share of the TCF target for 1997. 
101. Many developing countries, including Tunisia, would be unable to meet their 
growing energy needs in the coming decades without resorting to nuclear power. 
Small and medium power reactors were well suited to the consumption requirements 
of small countries, and Tunisia had therefore been pleased to host a recent meeting 
of the Advisory Group on the Status and Introduction of Small and Medium Power 
Reactors in Developing Countries. He hoped that the Agency would continue to 
support the Group. 
102. A feasibility study on the use of nuclear power plants for water desalination in 
North Africa had shown that such plants were appropriate for countries which, like 
Tunisia, had medium-size electricity grids. The work being done on small and medium 
power reactors was relevant in that connection also. 
103. It was essential to strike a balance between spreading the benefits of the 
peaceful uses of nuclear technology and protecting the international community from 
the dangers inherent in the use of nuclear facilities -hence the importance of 
comprehensive safeguards. While welcoming the efforts being made to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards system, his country believed that three basic principles should be 
observed at all times: firstly, a balance must be maintained between support for 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 27 

safeguards and respect for national sovereignty; secondly, strengthening of the 
Agency's safeguards system must not create an undue financial burden requiring an 
increase in contributions to the Regular Budget (the costs of Agency safeguards should 
be met by Member States in accordance with the scale of their nuclear activities); 
thirdly, all States must accept comprehensive Agency safeguards. 

104. In resolution GC(XXV)/RES/389, the General Conference had, in 1981, called for 
an expansion of the Board of Governors so as to achieve more equitable representation 
for Africa and for the Middle East and South Asia. Such an expansion would not have 
an adverse impact on the Board's efficiency; in fact, it would stimulate dialogue and 
enrich the Board's proceedings. The General Conference should take appropriate 
action at its current session. 
105. The extension of the NPT had been an encouraging development, and his 
country would like to see all States become NPT parties. Tunisia was pleased that the 
United Nations General Assembly had endorsed the principle of a comprehensive ban 
on nuclear testing and trusted that a CTBT would be concluded in due course, to be 
followed eventually by complete nuclear disarmament. 
106. The efforts being made to bring about peace in the Middle East would prosper 
more if all nuclear facilities and activities in the region were subject to safeguards 
designed to ensure that all nuclear weapons of mass destruction were removed. 
Because of its geographical situation, Tunisia was following developments in that 
connection very closely. As an African country, it had signed the African NuclearWeapon-
Free Zone Treaty, but the proximity of Africa to the Middle East meant that 
the benefits of that treaty could not be fully enjoyed until the spectre of weapons of 
mass destruction in the Middle East had been dispelled. 
107. Mr. BØJER (Denmark) said that his country, which strongly endorsed the 
"Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament" adopted at 
the conclusion of the NPT Review and Extension Conference, regarded the indefinite 
extension of the NPT as a historic event demonstrating that nuclear non-proliferation 
was now a universally accepted principle. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 28 

108. The NPT Review and Extension Conference had agreed to strengthen the NPT 
review process. That decision meant that the Agency would shortly be asked whether 
it had strengthened the effectiveness of its safeguards and improved its capability for 
detecting undeclared nuclear activities. The strengthening of safeguards should 
therefore be a key priority of the Agency. 
109. The progress made by the Board under Programme 93+2 was welcome, but 
many problems remained. In his statement, the Director General had referred to the 
balance between the advantages which Member States might gain from strengthened 
safeguards and the burdens which they might feel they were assuming. It was 
obvious to the Danish Government that such far-reaching and fundamental objectives 
as non-proliferation and international confidence-building justified considerable cost 
and effort. In fact, however, the burdens implied by Programme 93+2 would be quite 
modest. 
110. It was a matter of concern to his country that many non-nuclear-weapon States 
parties to the NPT had not yet concluded safeguards agreements pursuant to their 
treaty obligations. Although the States in question had no significant nuclear activities, 
it was important for the credibility of the NPT and the safeguards system that all States 
parties to the NPT complied with their obligations under Article III. 
111. The experience with Iraq had demonstrated that trade in sensitive nuclear and 
dual-use items, if not properly monitored, could contribute to nuclear weapons 
programmes in countries which did not honour their non-proliferation obligations. 
Comprehensive export and supply controls were therefore vital to effective 
implementationoftheinternationalnon-proliferationregime. Inthatconnectionitwas 
encouraging to note the growing acceptance of the Nuclear Suppliers Group guidelines 
for trade in nuclear-related goods and technology. 
112. Nuclear safety was a question of vital importance to Denmark, whose decision 
in 1985 not to include the nuclear option in its energy planning had been based on 
safety concerns. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 29 

113. Satisfactory solutions had still not been found to the problems of nuclear safety 
and radioactive waste storage, and it was particularly regrettable that many nuclear 
power plants were operating at unacceptably low safety levels. 
114. Denmark was strongly supporting the initiatives which the Agency had taken 
with a view to the creation of a stronger and more dynamic nuclear safety culture. 
The expert review and advisory services offered by the Agency were extremely 
important, not least in connection with the safety assistance being given to countries 
of Central and Eastern Europe and to various newly independent States. Such 
assistance was vital for upgrading the safety of nuclear power plants built to earlier 
standards. Denmark had contributed through programmes of the European Union, by 
making voluntary contributions to the EBRD's Nuclear Safety Account and by allocating 
funds to bilateral assistance programmes. It nevertheless continued to believe that the 
only responsible solution for certain reactors operating in Central and Eastern Europe 
and in newly independent States would be to close them down as soon as possible. 
115. Denmark, which was supporting the efforts being made to develop legally 
binding agreements in the field of nuclear safety, hoped that the current negotiations 
on a convention on the safe management of radioactive waste would soon be finalized. 
Such a convention should be as comprehensive as possible, covering both civilian and 
military waste and the safety of spent fuel reprocessing facilities. 
116. It was essential that all countries with nuclear installations be parties to an 
effective nuclear liability regime. The signing by the Russian Federation of the Vienna 
Convention, one of the fundamental legal instruments in the nuclear liability field, and 
Ukraine's decision to accede to it were therefore welcome. 
117. Denmark was also supporting the efforts being made to strengthen the 
international nuclear liability regime through -inter alia -the conclusion of a 
supplementary funding convention providing for adequate levels of compensation. In 
that connection, it was pleased with the progress made in the Standing Committee on 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and hoped that a diplomatic conference on international 
nuclear liability could be convened in 1997. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 30 

118. Denmark attached great importance to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and could accept a 1997 TCF target of US $68 million. It had already 
pledged its full share of that target. 
119. The increasing attention being paid to the representation of women in the 
Secretariat and the Director General's commitment to continue efforts to improve the 
situation were welcome. His delegation looked forward to hearing about further 
tangible results of those efforts at the General Conference's 1997 session. 
120. Mr. GREGORIC(Slovenia)saidthatthepastyearhadwitnessedanumber 
of milestone events in the life of the international -not only the nuclear -community. 
The indefinite extension of the NPT had established the framework for dealing with 
nuclear non-proliferation, while the CTBT -just adopted by the General Assembly confirmed 
the global nature of long-term common security interests. Slovenia hoped 
that all countries would accede to the CTBT, which was of far-reaching importance. 
121. A significant step had also been made at the Moscow Nuclear Safety and 
Security Summit, which had reaffirmed the basic, internationally recognized principles 
relating to the safety of civilian nuclear reactors and nuclear waste management and 
should result in enhanced international collaboration in promoting high levels of 
nuclear safety worldwide. As regards the security of nuclear materials, the importance 
had been recognized of improving nuclear material accounting and control and 
strengthening physical protection systems. In addition, increased intergovernmental 
co-operation in preventing and combating illicit trafficking in nuclear materials had 
been advocated. 
122. The opening for signature of the Convention on Nuclear Safety in 1994 had 
been a major step towards the creation of a comprehensive and legally binding safety 
regime, and his Government welcomed the Convention's imminent entry into force; the 
Slovenian Parliament was in the final stage of ratifying the Convention. Successful 
implementation of the Convention would depend to a great extent on the 
establishmentofaneffectivepeerreview mechanismbasedoncomprehensivecountry 
reports. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 31 

123. His Government was satisfied with the progress made in drafting a convention 
on the safe management of radioactive waste and looked forward to the convening of 
a diplomatic conference in 1997 to adopt such a convention. 
124. The international conference entitled "One decade after Chernobyl: Summing 
up the consequences of the accident", held in April 1996 and co-sponsored by the 
European Commission, WHO and the Agency, had not reached a scientific consensus 
on all the issues connected with the Chernobyl accident, but it had led to a general 
acknowledgement that the scope of the disaster went far beyond the boundaries of 
nuclear safety and radiation protection and encompassed extremely significant social 
and economic aspects. 
125. Slovenia, which was supporting Programme 93+2, was pleased that the 
implementation of Part 1 measures was making good progress. Convinced that the 
Agency's safeguards system should be able to give credible assurances of the absence 
of undeclared nuclear facilities and activities, it was ready to accept Part 2 measures 
as well. 
126. As regards the physical protection of nuclear materials, Slovenia had invited the 
Secretariat to review its nuclear material accounting system and relevant physical 
protection standards in the light of current international guidelines. 
127. Slovenia was a strong supporter of the Agency's programme relating to illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources, and it was one of the 
30 countries which had so far provided points of contact for that programme. 
128. Slovenia endorsed both the Agency's continuous presence in Iraq, the purpose 
of which was to confirm Iraq's compliance with relevant Security Council resolutions, 
and the Agency's role in verifying the compliance ofthe DPRKwith its NPTsafeguards 
agreement. 
129. Recognizing the important role of the Agency in connection with efforts to 
establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in various regions, his country had welcomed the 
opening for signature of the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty in 
December 1995 and of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty in April 1996. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 32 

It would like to see the Agency and all States in the Middle East doing their utmost to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone there as soon as possible. 

130. His Government was pleased with the current efforts to make Agency technical 
co-operation more relevant through the launching of further Model Projects and 
regional projects and the introduction of more effective evaluation methods. Although 
the level of contributions to the TCF was below the levels achieved in the 1980s, it 
was encouraging to note that the financial situation in the technical co-operation area 
had improved. Slovenia was ready to assist more extensively in implementing Agency 
technical co-operation projects by making its facilities available for training courses, 
workshops and similar activities. 
131. The Agency was still faced by financial problems, the best solution for which 
would be for all Member States to fulfil their financial obligations. At the same time, 
further consideration should be given to making the most effective use of the funds 
available. For its part, Slovenia was fulfilling its Regular Budget obligations promptly, 
contributing to the safeguards budget as an "unshielded" State and paying its share 
of successive TCF targets. 
132. Substantial progress had been made with regard to international nuclear 
liability. Slovenia was pleased that further States had signed the Vienna Convention 
and the Joint Protocol and that the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage 
had adopted the text of a revised Vienna Convention. Regrettably, there had been no 
such progress as regards a supplementary funding convention, and his country would 
like all States participating in the work of the Committee to adopt a more flexible 
attitude on that issue. 
133. Slovenia, which was looking forward to the forthcoming ASSET mission to the 
Krško NPP, would continue to support the activities of the Agency. 
134. Mr. SURYOKUSUMO (Indonesia), afterwelcomingtheapprovalofMoldova 
for Agency membership, said his delegation had noted with appreciation the emphasis 
which the Director General had placed in his statement earlier in the week on the 
need to continuously improve the efficiency of the Agency. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 33 

135. His country was confident that the indefinite extension of the NPT would 
strengthen the Agency's role within the international non-proliferation regime, the 
ultimate goal of which, however, should be the complete elimination of nuclear 
weapons. 
136. His country believed that the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, 
which had been signed by the Heads of State or Government of all ten countries of the 
South East Asian region in December 1995, would strengthen peace and stability in 
that region. It hoped that the ten signatory States would ratify the Treaty before the 
Informal ASEAN Summit to be held in Indonesia in December and that the nuclearweapon 
States would accede to the Treaty's Protocol. 
137. Indonesia, which had ratified the Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material, the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and the Convention 
on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency, considered 
that the Convention on Nuclear Safety also had an important role to play in 
strengthening public confidence in nuclear power generation. His Government, which 
was in the process of setting up an independent nuclear regulatory body, therefore 
welcomed the fact that the Convention was soon to enter into force and intended to 
ratify it in the near future. 
138. His Government also welcomed the adoption of the CTBT by the United Nations 
General Assembly, but was concerned that it would take a long time to enter into 
force. Nevertheless, the adoption of the CTBT had demonstrated the determination of 
States to halt the nuclear arms race. 
139. His delegation was following with great interest the progress ofthe negotiations 
on a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management. With regard to illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials, which posed significant threats from both the radiation 
safety and the non-proliferation point of view, it commended the initiatives and 
precautionary measures which the Agency had taken to date. 
140. His delegation was also satisfied with the steps taken by the Department of 
Safeguards to improve the Agency's capability for detecting undeclared nuclear 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 34 

activities. It welcomed the progress made in developing and testing alternative 
safeguards measures, such as environmental monitoring, and also the increased 
involvement of national systems of nuclear material accounting and control. Indonesia 
was ready to continue participating in the associated field trials. 

141. As regards the Agency's technical co-operation activities, his delegation was 
confident that the shift towards technology transfer would not only enhance the 
security and safety of food supplies in developing countries, but also lead to 
improvements in health care and environmental protection. 
142. Agency technical assistance had made a significant contribution to economic 
progress in Indonesia. Thanks to irradiation techniques, improved varieties of food 
crops had been developed, the latest being the Cilosari rice variety released in 
July 1996. 
143. Another success had been the development of Urea Multinutrient Molasses 
Blocks (UMMB) through laboratory research involving tracer techniques. On the island 
of Java, the use of UMMB as supplementary feed had increased animal body weight 
and milk production to such an extent that farmers' overall incomes had increased by 
600%. The National Atomic Energy Agency (BATAN) was now collaborating with the 
Ministry of Agriculture and other governmental departments in extending the 
programme in question to other regions. His Government was grateful to the Agency, 
and particularly the Department of Technical Co-operation, for the continued support 
provided. 
144. His Government, which was pleased with the technology transfer achieved 
through the Agency, was also grateful to those donor countries which had funded 
footnote-a/ projects in Indonesia. 
145. In the context of the Agency's support for nuclear power programmes in 
developing countries, he said that Indonesia greatly appreciated the assistance 
provided to BATAN by the Agency through its review of a feasibility study relating to 
proposals for the construction of a nuclear power plant -Indonesia's first -on the 
Muria Peninsula (Java) which had been carried out by groups of experts recruited by 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 35 

the Agency and had focused on the acceptability of the selected site and the design 
basis parameters. His Government now looked forward to the Agency's providing 
advice on potential external events and environmental impacts. 

146. Having benefited from RCA activities during the past 25 years, Indonesia 
regarded an extension of the RCA for a further five years as extremely important for 
its national development. It was proud of the fact that in 1994 the United Nations 
Joint Inspection Unit had awarded to a UNDP/RCA/Agency collaborative effort one of 
its best ever ratings for a project in the field of science and technology. 
147. That success reflected the excellent performance of the RCA Co-ordinator and 
the keen interestand serious commitmentofthe participating MemberStates, scientists 
and project co-ordinators. Also, it testified to the maturity of the interrelationships 
among RCA member States, between the RCA and the Agency, and between the RCA 
and various regional and other international bodies. The maturing process, together 
with the changes in the priorities of various RCA member States and the Agency over 
the past 25 years, should be taken into account in the future implementation of the 
RCA, the aim being to maximize its usefulness and strengthen TCDC. His delegation 
therefore welcomed the decision taken by the RCA member States in Beijing in June 
to review the structure and management of RCA programmes and activities with a 
view to achieving further improvements. 
148. In conclusion, he reiterated his Government's support for the Agency's efforts to 
promote international co-operation in the peaceful and safe utilization of nuclear 
science and technology, particularly in developing countries, and announced that 
Indonesia would continue to offer its facilities for the use of Agency fellows and to 
organize regional and/or interregional training courses at no cost to the Agency. 
149. Mr. COLL (Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials (ABACC)) said that it had been four years and nine months since 
ABACC's establishment and two and a half years since the entry into force of the 
Quadripartite Agreement between ABACC, Brazil, Argentina and the Agency. 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 36 

150. In 1995, a total of 149 inspections had been carried out in Argentina and Brazil, 
accounting for 710 man-days in the field, while in 1996 there had been 
96 inspections accounting for 374 man-days. In the same two years, 39 
and 21 nuclear material samples had been taken, 498 and 165 containment seals had 
been applied and 518 and 364 accounting reports had been received from the two 
countries and processed through ABACC's database. 
151. Under the Quadripartite Agreement, co-operation with the Agency had increased 
satisfactorily until the requisite level had been achieved. All Agency inspections were 
being co-ordinated with those of ABACC, and co-operation in the field between the 
two groups of inspectors had proved to be effective. 
152. The Brazilian and Argentine facility attachments were being discussed with the 
respective national authorities, and the ABACC Secretariat was hopeful that the first 
of them would enter into force in the near future. 
153. The progress made in preparing guidelines for the co-ordination of the two 
organizations' inspection activities was an excellent example of the good relationship 
between ABACC and the Agency. Those guidelines -reflecting the Agency's present 
safeguards system with the addition of Programme 93+2 Part 1 measures -would be 
of prime importance in enhancing future co-operation, and the underlying principles 
were already being applied by the inspectors in the field, particularly as regards the 
common use of equipment. 
154. When ABACC's common system for nuclear material accountancy and control 
had gone into operation, in 1992, safeguards had been of the conventional type, 
limited to the materials and facilities declared by States. The strengthening of 
safeguards, under Programme 93+2, with a view to the detection of undeclared 
nuclear materials and facilities had changed the picture entirely. Despite the fact that 
the role of regional safeguards systems in that exercise had not yet been clearly 
defined, therewasnothingtopreventABACCfromincorporatingtheconceptsofPart 1 
of Programme 93+2 into its future activities. ABACC had replied in that vein when 
responding to an Agency questionnaire about regional systems, information handling 

GC(40)/OR.5 
page 37 

and the use of advanced techniques like remote sensing and environmental 
monitoring. Co-operation between ABACCand the United States Department ofEnergy 
(DOE)indevelopingandapplyingsuchtechniqueshadbeenmostfruitful. ABACCwas 
now participating in a DOE-sponsored international remote sensing programme and 
had at its headquarters a data reception system linked to the Embalse NPP in 
Argentina. 

155. With regard to Part 2 of Programme 93+2, ABACC had been invited to 
participate as an observer in the meetings of the Board's Committee 24 and hoped to 
play an active role there. 
156. Regional safeguards could play an important part in the Agency's future 
safeguards system, as mutual monitoring by neighbouring countries was the best 
guarantee of confidence in a region. Since there were still very few regional 
safeguards systems, ABACC was ready to make its experience available to any 
interested States. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

1 

p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
May 1997 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
ENGLISH 

GENERAL 

Original: FRENCH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 18 September 1996, at 3 p.m. 


President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 
Later: Mr. DASQUE (France) 
Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) 

CONTENTS 
Item 


of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (continued) 1-198 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Italy 1-6 
Algeria 7-15 
Canada 16 -25 
Czech Republic 26 -35 
Turkey 36 -52 
Lithuania 53 -61 
Finland 62 -66 
Colombia 67 -73 
Armenia 74 -80 
Qatar 81 -83 
Malaysia 84 -97 
Brazil 98 -112 
Austria 113 -120 
New Zealand 121 -129 
Belarus 130 -147 
Ghana 148 -163 
Poland 164 -174 
Ethiopia 175 -190 
Paraguay 191 -198 

[*] GC(40)/22. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96 -03365 (XXVIII) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.6 
page 2 
Abbreviations used in this record 
ABACC Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 
AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear Science and 
Technology in Latin America 
ASSET Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Assistance 
Convention Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency 
Bangkok Treaty Treaty on the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
CANDU Canada deuterium-uranium [reactor] 
CIS Commonwealth of Independent States 
CPF Country Programme Framework 
CTBT Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
CTBTO Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Organization 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Early 
Notification 
Convention Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
G-7 Group of Seven 
MOX Mixed oxide 
NPP Nuclear power plant 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OECD Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
OSART Operational Safety Review Team 
Pelindaba Treaty African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 
R&D Research and Development 
Rarotonga Treaty South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
RBMK High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 
Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
SAGTAC Standing Advisory Group on Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
TACC Technical Assistance and Co-operation Committee 
TC Technical co-operation 
TCDC Technical co-operation among developing countries 
TCF Technical Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
UNDP United Nations Development Programme 
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme 
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization 
Vienna Convention Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1963) 
WHO World Health Organization 
WMO World Meteorological Organization 
WWER Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(40)/OR.6 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (continued) 

1. Mr. INDELICATO (Italy), having supported the statement made by Ireland 
on behalf of the European Union, said that in the first half of 1996 Italy, in its capacity 
as President of the European Union, had spared no effort to establish a common 
position of the Fifteen on Programme 93+2 and to contribute thereby in a constructive 
way to the necessary dialogue with the Agency. The success of the important new 
measures proposed by the Director General to strengthen the effectiveness and 
improve the efficiency of the Agency's safeguards depended on the approval of 
Member States. His delegation strongly supported Programme 93+2 and hoped that 
the committee responsible for drafting the model protocol would conclude its work 
promptly. It reiterated the hope that States which had not concluded comprehensive 
safeguards agreements would accept the Programme 93+2 measures applicable to 
them in line with their non-proliferation commitments. 
2. The year 1996 -the tenth anniversary of the tragic accident at Chernobyl -had 
seen an intensification of international co-operation in the field of nuclear safety. That 
continued to be a matter of paramount importance for Italy, which was consequently 
participating constructively in multilateral efforts aimed at improving the safety of 
nuclear facilities, particularly of reactors operated in Central and Eastern Europe and 
in the CIS. The Moscow Summit had contributed greatly to advancing the cause of 
nuclear safety in the world. In that context, Italy appreciated the decision by President 
Kuchma, just announced, to shut down unit 1 of the Chernobyl power plant by the end 
of 1996 as a first step towards the complete shutdown of the plant by the year 2000, 
in accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding signed with the G-7 in 
December 1995. 
3. Intensive negotiations had been taking place for several years under the 
Agency's initiative with a view to preparing new international legal instruments on 
crucial matters related to the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Italy 
attached great importance to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, which it would ratify 
shortly, and wished to underline -on the eve of its entry into force -the relevance 
of its provisions, particularly as regards the peer review process. He trusted that full 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 4 

application of the Convention by all the States parties would contribute greatly to 
improving nuclear safety in the world. 

4. His delegation had participated in a constructive spirit and made specific 
proposals in negotiations conducted under the aegis of the Agency to elaborate a 
convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, as well as on revision of 
the Vienna Convention and the establishment of a global supplementary fund. 
Significant, although not always decisive, progress had been made. Italy hoped that 
all the countries concerned were prepared to make the concessions necessary for the 
negotiations to be concluded swiftly and successfully. 
5. Although Italy had no nuclear power plant in operation, it was participating 
actively in international work aimed at substantially improving power plant safety. 
Studies were being carried out within the framework of international co-operation to 
find innovative solutions that could be adopted at the beginning of the next century. 
Thus, the Italian Electricity Agency (ENEL) was participating, together with other 
European partners, in the definition of European electricity producer specifications for 
new generation reactors to gradually replace existing reactors early in the 21st 
century. The Italian Agency for New Technologies, Energy and the Environment 
(ENEA) was undertaking studies of new generation reactor systems and had recently 
completed, on behalf of General Electric and Westinghouse, experimental programmes 
on new components for simplified boiling water reactors and the AP600. Finally, the 
design of a small multipurpose modular reactor with enhanced passive safety features, 
named MARS (Multipurpose Advanced Reactor inherently Safe), had been completed 
by ENEA and the University of Rome. The use of MARS for co-generation of electricity 
and process heat for desalination appeared very promising. Italy fully supported the 
plan to produce potable water economically described in document GC(40)/4. 
6. Italy was continuing work on the management of nuclear waste from ENEL's 
phased-out power plants. ENEA was conducting a comprehensive programme on the 
management of nuclear waste and material stored in nuclear fuel cycle facilities. That 
programme had recently received special funding from the Italian Government. Italy 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 5 

was therefore actively participating in research in the nuclear field aimed at preserving 
and improving knowledge acquired over the years. 

7. Mr. DAHMANI (Algeria), having welcomed the approval of Moldova for 
Agency membership, recalled that on 10 September the United Nations General 
Assembly had adopted a resolution on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. 
Algeria, which had always supported the non-proliferation regime and had 
participated actively in efforts made by the international community to attain that 
objective, was gratified at that achievement in the nuclear disarmament process. The 
Treaty would strengthen security and peace in the world and contribute to the 
utilizationofatomicenergyforpeacefulpurposes. Theinternationalcommunity, which 
had called for a nuclear test ban, had spent a long time negotiating that agreement 
which, despite its imperfections and omissions (because, for example, it did not cover 
laboratory tests), did have the merit of banning nuclear explosions. 
8. That breakthrough followed the indefinite extension of the NPT, to which 
Algeria had acceded. In an international environment subject to both tension and 
change, those achievements restored hope to countries for which use of the atom for 
peaceful purposes was an economic development objective. That was the case for 
Algeria which had completely banned all non-peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Having 
voluntarily and unilaterally submitted its two research reactors, NUR and ES-SALAM, 
to Agency safeguards, it had acceded to the NPT on 12 January 1995 and then signed 
a comprehensive safeguards agreement with the Agency on 30 March 1996. Co-
operation was now accompanied by the utmost confidence and transparency. 
9. As a follow-up to those actions, Algeria was preparing to establish a national 
nuclear energy body which would be responsible for implementing a multiform and 
multisectorial policy for the development of nuclear energy and nuclear techniques in 
the country. He recalled that in 1987 Algeria had acceded to the Early Notification and 
Assistance Conventions and in September 1994 had been one of the first countries to 
sign the Convention on Nuclear Safety. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 6 

10. Algeria welcomed the signature, in Cairo, of the Pelindaba Treaty creating a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. The African continent was thereby demonstrating 
its confidence in the peaceful use of nuclear energy for development. However, that 
sentiment was overshadowed by the fact that in the Middle East, which was very close 
to Africa, a single country continued to block the establishment of a similar zone in the 
region. 
11. The establishment and strengthening of confidence between States, a 
precondition for the full development of peaceful uses of the atom, could only come 
about as a result of a truly global and non-discriminatory non-proliferation approach 
and a policy of total and universal disarmament. Thus, strengthening the effectiveness 
and improving the efficiency of the safeguards system were not achievable unless 
universality of the system was taken into account and the developing countries 
received assurances against the use, or threat of the use, of nuclear weapons against 
non-nuclear States. Furthermore, the system should not be an instrument limiting 
access to technologies in the field of the peaceful use of nuclear energy and socioeconomic 
development. 
12. Algeria supported the aim ofProgramme 93+2 and welcomed the establishment 
of a committee to prepare a protocol on the application of safeguards. It had 
participated activelyin the first session ofthat committee and had submitted comments 
in writing. It would continue to co-operate actively in the establishment of a more 
reliable safeguards system, whilst maintaining that those measures should not hinder 
legitimate access to nuclear technologies. Such access was being obtained, inter alia, 
through nationaldevelopmentprogrammes and with the help oftechnicalco-operation 
between the Agency and Member States. Those activities, vital for the developing 
countries, unfortunately did not always receive the support they deserved from the 
Agency. The growing imbalance between safeguards and technical co-operation 
activities needed to be remedied. In that connection, Algeria welcomed the decision 
of the Board of Governors to re-establish the Informal Working Group on the Financing 
of Technical Co-operation, to which it would give its full support. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 7 

13. In view of its technological potential, Algeria was directly interested in 
enlargement of the Board which should take into consideration the views and 
aspirations of developing countries, particularly those in Africa. 
14. With regard to the nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East, Algeria 
remained concerned about the obstacle presented by Israel's position. That position 
should be seen in the light of Israel's blocking of the Middle East peace process and 
its refusal to accede to the NPT, behaviour which ran counter to the objectives of the 
Agency and the NPT regime. It was surprising therefore that that country was setting 
its sights on a seat on the Board of Governors to represent a region in which it was 
not pursuing the use of nuclear energy for peaceful and development purposes. 
Algeria therefore wished to reaffirm that it was a matter for the Middle East and South 
Asia area group to decide which countries it accepted as members. Algeria was also 
concerned that negotiations on expansion of the Board of Governors, through 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute were not producing any tangible results. 
15. In conclusion, Algeria reiterated its full support for the Agency in promoting the 
peaceful applications of nuclear energy and facilitating technology transfer in aid of 
national development. 
16. Mr. WALKER (Canada), having welcomed Moldova to membership of the 
Agency, said that one of the most challenging issues currently facing the international 
community was the safe and secure disposition of nuclear material no longer required 
for military purposes. At the Moscow Nuclear Safety and Security Summit in April, the 
G-7 and Russian leaders had agreed that international co-operation was needed. 
Canada's Prime Minister, noting the possible positive benefits to non-proliferation and 
reduction of weapons plutonium stockpiles, had announced that Canada had agreed, 
in principle, to the concept of using plutonium in MOXfuel in Canadian-based CANDU 
reactors. To that end, studies were being conducted by Canadian establishments in 
collaboration with the United States and the Russian Federation. 
17. During the past three years, Programme 93+2 on strengthening and improving 
the efficiency of safeguards had evolved towards a system that would help the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 8 

international community move from conventional verification of declared nuclear 
material to strengthened measures that would give the Agency greater capability to 
detect undeclared nuclear material and activities. In that way trust and transparency 
would be increased. Canada was pleased with the progress made by the Committee 
on Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards 
System during its first session in July, and would continue to play an active role until 
the Committee completed its task and presented a final draft protocol for 
complementary legal authority to the Board of Governors. Canada called upon all 
Committee members to demonstrate a spirit of co-operation and to recognize, after 
three years of deliberations, that strengthened and more efficient safeguards were 
imperative; tinkering with the current system would do singular disservice to the 
nuclear non-proliferation regime. His Government would continue to work closely with 
the Agency on a joint project to develop a remodelled safeguards approach for nuclear 
material in Canada. 

18. Canada strongly supported the new strategic directions adopted by the Agency 
in pursuing its technical co-operation programme, and thanked the Deputy Director 
General for Technical Co-operation and his staff for their earnest approach to carrying 
out reforms. The Canadian Government consistently contributed to the TCF, and the 
Canadian nuclear industry was increasingly involved in technical co-operation projects 
and consultations. A particular example was the Agency's nuclear desalination 
programme. For a number of years, that programme had been strongly supported by 
Canada, which would continue to work with the Agency and other Member States in 
advancing such programmes, which offered great potential for resolving some 
fundamental problems of sustainable development. 
19. In the field of nuclear power, Canada believed that the Agency was playing an 
important role, especially in its efforts to facilitate the exchange of technical 
information and operational experience with nuclear power programmes. It would 
actively support the newly established International Working Group on Advanced 
Technologies for Heavy Water Reactors. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 9 

20. Consistent with the expansion of nuclear applications, the strengthening of 
nuclear safety as one of the pillars of the Agency's mandate was a natural and positive 
development. Canada looked forward to working with the first Deputy Director 
General for Nuclear Safety and remained committed to participation in Agency activities 
in that field. The entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety was a 
particularly important development. Canada had ratified the Convention, and it urged 
all signatories to complete ratification procedures as soon as possible. The Convention 
clearly demonstrated that nuclear safety was an international concern that deserved 
the highest priority. Canada also supported the early conclusion of a convention on 
radioactive waste management as a necessary element in the elaboration of global 
norms in the area of nuclear safety. 
21. On budgetary issues, Canada favoured a policy of zero nominal growth in all 
international organizations. It had agreed to the 1997 budget proposal reluctantly in 
view of the fact that the overall assessment level had remained unchanged thanks to 
a more accurate estimate of investment income. Canada expected such budgetary 
transparency to continue and for further measures recommended by the External 
Auditor to be incorporated. That should result in an actual reduction in the Agency's 
budget for 1998. 
22. Afteralongperiodofrestructuring, Canada'snuclearsectorremainedstableand 
forward looking. Canada had signed over 20 nuclear co-operation agreements with 
more than 35 countries, the most recent being with Brazil and Ukraine. Its nuclear 
industry was active in the formulation and execution of extensive nuclear power 
programmes, based on the CANDUpressurized heavy water reactor. It was also active 
in the formulation of radioactive waste and nuclear safety measures, and had cooperative 
ventures with partners from many countries. The Agency had an important 
role to play in facilitating such collaborative programmes and the exchange of 
information resulting from them. 
23. SevenCANDUreactorswereonthelistofthetop25reactorsworldwideonthe 
basis of lifetime performance to the end of December 1995. Canada was especially 
proud in April 1996 when Cernavoda-1, the first Canadian-designed nuclear facility 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 10 

in Eastern Europe, achieved criticality. It looked forward to further collaboration with 
the Government of Romania, and congratulated it on its success. The first CANDU 
reactor in the Republic of Korea, Wolsong-1, continued to have outstanding 
performance. The construction of three additional CANDU reactors on the same site 
was well under way and unit 2 was due to enter service in 1997. 

24. Another major highlight of the past year was the progress achieved in nuclear 
co-operation between Canada and China. The signing in July of a co-operation 
agreement for the construction of two CANDU reactors was a major advance; Canada 
looked forward to working with China on its nuclear programme. 
25. Over the coming year, Canadian efforts would be devoted to achieving a 
consensus on the draft protocol for complementary legal authority for Programme 
93+2, moving the Agency further in the direction of a zero nominal growth budget and 
assisting in the task of confidence-building on the nuclear safety front, with full 
implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and negotiations for a convention 
on radioactive waste and spent fuel management. Canada would also continue its 
work in TACC, SAGTAC and other Agency forums in support of the new strategic 
direction for technical co-operation. 
26. Mr. ŠTULLER (Czech Republic), after endorsing the statement delivered 
by Ireland on behalf of the European Union and associated countries and welcoming 
the admission of Moldova, said that one of the most notable achievements of the past 
year in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and ionizing radiation 
concerned the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The Czech Republic noted with 
satisfaction that, with Mexico's ratification of the Convention, the number of countries 
having ratified it was now sufficient for its entry into force. It commended all the 
Member States party to the Convention on completing the procedures required under 
their legislation so that the Convention could enter into force. The Czech Republic, one 
of the first twenty signatories, had deposited its instrument of approval with the 
Agency a year previously. It urged all Member States of the Agency which had not 
already done so to sign, accept, approve and/or ratify the Convention as soon as 
possible. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 11 

27. Not all the international communities' efforts had achieved such good results. 
The Conference on Disarmament in Geneva had failed to reach consensus on the final 
text of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. Nevertheless, the Czech Republic 
still hoped to see the situation resolved and the Treaty enter into force. 
28. Another international legal instrument with an important bearing on global 
security was the NPT, whose 25th anniversary had been celebrated at the same time 
as the NPT Review and Extension Conference in New York in spring 1995. The States 
Parties to the Treaty had decided to extend it indefinitely. His delegation was pleased 
to learn that the review process would continue and that the preparatory committee 
would meet to begin the task in April 1997. By then Member States would be in a 
position to focus their efforts on the issues raised at the Review and Extension 
Conference. 
29. In its 40 year existence the Agency had endeavoured, under the terms of its 
Statute, to support and promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. Despite many 
difficulties, nuclear power had expanded considerably. The Agency's support for the 
development of nuclear medicine, the elaboration of new methods based on the use 
of ionizing radiation in agriculture and industry, and the implementation of water 
resource assessment programmes contributed substantially to the progress made in 
those areas of human activity and benefited the whole of mankind. 
30. The NPT Review and Extension Conference had confirmed that the Treaty 
remained an indispensable instrument for maintaining world peace and that the role 
of the Agency in enforcing its principles was unrivalled. The Czech Republic endorsed 
the Agency's safeguards activities and supported its efforts to strengthen the 
effectiveness and enhance the efficiency of the system. It welcomed the establishment 
of the committee responsible for drafting the text of the additional protocol to 
safeguards agreements and would play an active part in its work. 
31. In that context, it was worth mentioning some examples of practical cooperation 
between the Czech Republic and the Agency aimed at strengthening 
safeguards. In 1994 and 1995 the Czech Republic had implemented two national 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 12 

projects closely concerned with strengthening the effectiveness of the safeguards 
system. As promised, it had reported on the outcome of that activity to the Deputy 
Director General for Safeguards in June 1996. His delegation was convinced that the 
results would help the Agency develop new methods for detecting possible clandestine 
and undeclared nuclear activities. A further example related to the application of 
safeguards. In accordance with Article III of the NPT the Czech Republic, in cooperation 
with the Secretariat, had drawn up a new INFCIRC/153-type safeguards 
agreement. It had been approved by the Board of Governors the previous week and 
had just been signed. 

32. The Czech Republic was one of the countries where nuclear power played a 
major role. Some 20% of the country's electricity was produced by the Dukovany 
nuclear power plant, and construction of the Temelin plant was in progress. The entry 
into service of the latter would double the Czech Republic's installed nuclear capacity. 
His Government's policy in that area complied strictly with all the basic principles of 
nuclear safety and radiation protection enshrined in the international agreements to 
which the country was a party. With those principles in mind, the Czech Republic was 
introducing radical improvements to the design of the Temelin plant and upgrading the 
WWER units in operation at Dukovany. In parallel with those efforts to improve 
nuclear safety a dynamic transformation of his country's nuclear legislation was taking 
place. A new Act to replace the existing laws was being discussed by Parliament. It 
was based on internationally adopted principles of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection and complied with the legislation in force in the Member States of the 
European Union. 
33. Safety, openness and full transparency were the fundamental principles and 
objectives of Czech policy in the nuclear field, as reflected in the conclusions of the 
many missions carried out by the Agency and other international organizations. The 
improvement in the nuclear safety of WWER reactors was an ongoing process being 
carried out in close co-operation with the Agency and international technical 
assistance programmes. The Agency's extrabudgetary programme on WWER reactor 
safety was particularly useful for the regulatory bodies, nuclear power plant operators 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 13 

and other organizations involved in all countries having such reactors. The programme 
provided for the preparation, with the active participation of the countries concerned, 
oflistsofthe variousWWERdesign deficienciestobe eliminated, aswellasforAgency 
missions to reactor sites in order to evaluate the implementation of corrective 
measures. That programme had also contributed to the upgrading of Czech nuclear 
power plants. In that regard, his delegation wished to convey to the Agency and all 
donor countries the appreciation for the support they had given to the Association of 
State Nuclear Regulatory Bodies of Countries Operating WWER-type Reactors which 
had been expressed at the Association's third regular meeting, held in Prague in 
June 1996 under the chairmanship of the Czech Republic. 

34. With regard to technical co-operation, in 1995 the Agency had begun a new 
two-year programme for the Czech Republic. The programme was concerned with 
nuclear fuel assessment, safety culture and the management of radioactive waste. For 
the 1997-98 biennial cycle, the Czech Republic in collaboration with the Secretariat 
had prepared a Model Project in the area of health care which should have a 
considerable impact on the whole of the population. 
35. The former Czechoslovakia had received hardly any technical assistance from 
the Agency and neither had the Czech Republic in the two years which followed its 
creation. However, the Czech Republic had always been aware of the cost of technical 
assistance programmes and their importance for the recipient countries. Accordingly, 
it had always paid its contribution to the TCF in full and on time. It was willing to 
provide expert services and funding for future projects which would enable it to share 
its experience, and it hoped that that commitment would be taken into account when 
its requests for technical assistance were being considered. 
36. Ms. OK(Turkey), having extended a welcome to Moldova, said that during 
the past year the Agency had experienced some very positive developments in a 
number of areas. Following the indefinite extension of the NPT, it had made 
considerable efforts to improve the safeguards system and verification activities. 
Document GOV/INF/796 gave a very clear picture of the safeguards commitments 
undertaken by Member States of the Agency, and Turkey was pleased that the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 14 

Governments of the United States, the United Kingdom and France had indicated their 
intention to assume new commitments in line with the measures foreseen in 
Programme 93+2. It was highly desirable for commitments undertaken under 
Programme 93+2 to be uniform. 

37. Turkey fully supported the measures foreseen in Programme 93+2, including 
broader access to information, no-notice inspections and physical access to undeclared 
sites. Those measures, coupled with new methods and technologies such as 
environmental sampling and the universal reporting scheme, should make the system 
more effective. She hoped that those measures would be applied to all, including the 
nuclear-weapon States and States which had concluded item-specific safeguards 
agreements; they could only be effective if they were universally accepted in a spirit 
of mutual confidence. She hoped that Programme 93+2 would be finalized at the 
December session of the Board of Governors and that it would be implemented in 
1997. 
38. Progress achieved towards disarmament and non-proliferation would hopefully 
lead to adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty; substantial progress 
had been made on preparing an appropriate text, including measures to prevent 
nuclear tests and the administrative procedures. The new organization would be 
situated in Vienna and make use of some of the Agency's services. Her delegation 
hoped that countries with objections to the principle of gradual disarmament would 
demonstrate sufficient flexibility to join the large number of those which had 
enthusiastically embraced that principle and that the new Treaty would operate from 
the start without any exclusions. 
39. In parallel with those events of global significance, adoption of the African 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty marked the beginning of an era of collective use of 
nuclear science and technology for economic and social development. Adoption of that 
Treaty also demonstrated the commitment of African States to maintaining peace and 
security and to supporting universality of the nuclear non-proliferation regime. She 
hoped that the African continent would serve as a model for the Middle East in that 
regard. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 15 

40. Turkey welcomed the Director General's efforts, through continued consultations 
with the Middle East countries, to facilitate the early application of full-scope Agency 
safeguards to all nuclear activities in the region. The preparation of a model 
agreement was a necessary step towards the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in that region, although some divergence of views existed among the countries 
concerned with regard to the timing of the application of full-scope safeguards and the 
establishment of such a zone in the Middle East. Turkey considered that it was still 
possible to build confidence and co-operation in the region. The quest for 
comprehensive peace in the region was all the more important as armed conflicts were 
frequent and she hoped that the consummation of the peace process in the Middle 
East would be accompanied by the creation of a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
41. Turkey was following closely the Agency's activities concerning Iraq and took 
note of the assurance given by the Iraqi authorities to the Director General of their 
intention to facilitate the Agency's monitoring activities. She hoped that Iraq would 
continue to co-operate both with the Security Council and the Agency so that the 
sanctions, which were creating difficulties for the Iraqi people and affecting economic 
activity in the region, would be lifted. 
42. The most significant event of the past year concerned nuclear safety. 1996 had 
been the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident which, at the time, had had 
serious consequences for Turkey. The conference on Chernobyl in Vienna had 
highlighted the continuing health and social effects of that accident. Nevertheless, the 
accident had had a positive consequence since the Agency was now focusing more on 
nuclear safety issues. The potential risks of the RBMK and WWER reactors and the 
need to upgrade their safety had been closely examined. In particular, there was now 
a willingness to co-operate on the safety standards to be applied to the Armenian 
Medzamor reactor, which left a lot to be desired from the safety point of view and was 
situated only 30 km from the Turkish border. 
43. Another important development was the entry into force of the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety. Turkey was pleased that a minimum level of responsibility would 
apply in future and appreciated the Secretariat's efforts to clarify the review process 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 16 

and define its own role. Turkey, which had been one of the first countries to ratify 
that Convention, would comply scrupulously with its obligations in the hope that cooperation 
on nuclear safety would prove fruitful. 

44. The draft convention on the safety of radioactive waste management should be 
ready for signature at the beginning of 1997. Her delegation paid special tribute to 
Professor Baer and other experts who had played a leading role in drafting rules on 
the management of radioactive waste and spent fuel and on the transboundary 
movement of those materials. In addition, the Standing Committee on Liability for 
Nuclear Damage had resolved a lot of the outstanding issues and managed to prepare 
the full texts of a protocol to amend the Vienna Convention and a draft supplementary 
funding convention. The Standing Committee should be able to complete its work at 
the following session and she hoped that a diplomatic conference on liability for 
nuclear damage could be held in 1997 with a view to adopting the protocol to amend 
the Vienna Convention. 
45. Progress in nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and nuclear liability 
had placed new responsibilities on the Agency; Turkey hoped that the Secretariat 
would equip itself with the means to carry out its new tasks in a realistic and 
scientifically sound way. It had repeatedly emphasized the importance of the Agency's 
mission in those areas and was pleased to see that the Secretariat now had the legal 
authority to carry it out. 
46. At the previous session of the General Conference she had dwelt on how 
particular knowledge and experience acquired by a Member State could be passed on 
to other Member States in the context of regional co-operation ventures, and indicated 
her country's willingness to place its facilities at the disposal of other developing 
countries. Since then, Turkey, with the support of the Agency, had set up a facility for 
processing radioactive waste from hospitals, industry, research activities and research 
reactors in Turkey and the region as a whole. The staff of the Turkish Atomic Energy 
Authority now had the necessary skills to carry out their work in a safe and technically 
correct way. The Agency had requested Turkey's support for its programme to 
introduce staff in Member States of the region to the principles of predisposal 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 17 

radioactive waste management by organizing demonstration courses at the Cekmece 
Nuclear Research and Training Centre. The first demonstration had been held in May 
1996 with the participation of experts from Albania, Greece and Syria. It would be a 
good thing for similar regional demonstration centres to be established in other 
regions, using the human resources and equipment available in Member States, and 
Turkey had submitted a draft resolution on that issue which it hoped would be 
adopted unanimously. By making full use of the Agency's resources and technical 
capacity, Turkey had reached a level whereby it could now help the Agency in its 
important task of transferring nuclear waste management technology and know-how 
to other Member States. 

47. Technicalco-operationwasamongthemostusefuloftheAgency'sactivitiesand 
the implementation of Model Projects was having a beneficial influence on the 
planningandpreparationofTCprojects. Thatactivityshouldbepursuedinadynamic 
way through continuous evaluation of progress achieved. A generally applicable 
formulation for specific fields could be established for interested Member States. 
Upgrading requests from Member States would pay dividends. A "generalized Model 
Project scheme", taking into account the experience gained by Member States, could 
be used in preparing requests for similar projects. Thus, information would be pooled 
at a preliminary stage, when interested countries required preparatory assistance in 
developing their infrastructure. Furthermore, concerted efforts should be made at the 
project design stage to ensure the establishment of the necessary infrastructure, either 
within the framework ofCPFmissions or through a continuous exchange ofinformation 
between the Agency and developing Member States, with verifiable objectives being 
set for the specific problems. 
48. Commending the Department of Technical Co-operation on its efforts to 
strengthen collaboration with other international organizations, she highlighted the 
project to safeguard the marine environment in the Black Sea region, in which the 
Secretariat was co-operating with UNESCO, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic 
Commission, UNEP, WMO, UNDP and the World Bank. That project was very important 
for the Member States of the region, as its aim was to assess pollution in the Black 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 18 

Sea with a view to ameliorating the region as a whole, and it could well serve as a 
model for other regions. The strengthening of regional collaboration seemed 
particularly desirable for improving the efficiency and effectiveness of TC activities. 
The maximum advantage should be derived from the training facilities available, for 
example through the exchange of trainees and the organization of regional experts' 
meetings. In that context, her Government intended to pay in full its contribution to 
the Technical Co-operation Fund, i.e. US $255 000. 

49. Both in meetings of the Board of Governors and at the previous session of the 
General Conference, a number of countries, including Turkey, had expressed great 
interest in nuclear applications for improving water resources. The availability of 
good-quality water in sufficient quantity was one of the most pressing issues for many 
countries and it would become even more urgent in the future. Turkey had been 
among the first countries to include the application of isotope techniques for the 
management of water resources in its national programmes, with the establishment 
of a national isotope hydrology laboratory in 1960. The first interregional course 
organized by the Agency on that topic had been held in Ankara in 1964. Since then, 
the laboratory had been modernized with Agency support and equipped with the most 
up-to-date equipment, giving it the capacity to support hydrology-related activities in 
the region as a whole. With the experience and know-how it had acquired, Turkey 
could play a leading role in promoting isotope hydrology in the region. The best way 
of encouraging the use of nuclear applications for improving water resources was to 
undertake regional technical co-operation projects, and the results obtained would be 
applicable to other areas with similar climatological and geological characteristics. She 
therefore urged the Agency to initiate regional projects in that field, on which Turkey 
would be more than willing to collaborate. 
50. Turkey was at the crossroads of two major routes for illicit trafficking in nuclear 
materials, one connecting the Black Sea to the Mediterranean and the other connecting 
Europe to Asia and the Middle East. Statistical data on seizures of nuclear material 
were very indicative in that respect. Turkey firmly supported the Agency's efforts to 
combat illicit trafficking in radioactive materials and was transmitting all useful 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 19 

information on illicit trafficking incidents to the Agency's database. Combating 
trafficking in nuclear materials was to a large extent the responsibility of countries 
themselves, and the setting up of border controls and national systems of accounting 
and control of nuclear material would go a long way to resolving the problem. All the 
same, her delegation considered that, as that important issue was of a transboundary 
nature, the measures enumerated needed to be backed up by international cooperation. 
Identification of the international aspects of the problem and their 
resolution would be possible only through the conclusion of an international 
agreement. Although her delegation knew that its proposal for such an agreement 
would not meet with consensus, it still maintained that illicit trafficking in nuclear 
materials could not be overcome without having an international legal instrument 
committing parties to monitor and protect their radiation sources and to report any loss 
or theft of those sources to the Agency or other international organizations. She hoped 
that that proposal would gain the support of other countries in the near future so that 
work based on it could start. 

51. Having served as Chairperson of the Open-ended Consultative Group on 
Article VIoftheStatute, shewasdisappointedthatnoconsensushadyetbeenreached 
on that matter. She was confident that an acceptable and viable solution could be 
found for a reasonable expansion of the Board of Governors, considering the fact that 
the Executive Council of the future Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty 
Organization would be established in Vienna and would have 51 members. 
52. Finally, she welcomed the measures taken to increase the number of female 
staff members of the Secretariat, which in the past year had risen from 17.2 to 18%, 
and from 3.2 to 7.8% at the P-5 level and above. That was an appreciable result and 
she hoped that the Secretariat would take fresh measures aimed at achieving, the 
United Nations target of 35% within a reasonable time span. A more representative 
Secretariat and Board of Governors was bound to encourage genuine co-operation 
between States. 
53. Mr. KAZLAUSKAS (Lithuania), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova, 
commended the Agency on its work in elaborating and enforcing international legal 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 20 

instruments regulating States' obligations in the field of nuclear energy. Lithuania, 
aware of the huge international challenges involved in nuclear energy, had become 
a Member of the Agency in 1993, shortly after its independence. More recently, in 
June 1996, it had ratified the Convention on Nuclear Safety, realizing that as soon as 
that instrument entered into force, in October 1996, it would have a responsibility 
towards the international community. Lithuania would almost certainly need 
international assistance to help it meet its commitments. 

54. The tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident had called to mind that 
everything possible needed to be done to avoid similar catastrophes in the future. 
Lithuania had signed the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and 
was participating in the work of revising that instrument under the auspices of the 
Agency. While it recognized that the liability for damage under the Convention was 
inadequate, Lithuania, in the present state of its economy, could not take on the level 
of liability proposed in the new draft. It supported the proposals which had been 
made regarding the transition period and considered that with the Agency's assistance 
it could manage to solve the insurance issues associated with the RBMK-type reactors. 
55. Lithuania was developing a legislative framework for the energy sector. The 
Energy Law had been in force since 1994, the Ignalina NPP Physical Protection 
Regulations had been approved, a nuclear energy bill had been submitted to 
Parliament, and radiation protection legislation was being drafted. 
56. Lithuania supported all steps taken by the Agency to strengthen the 
effectiveness and improve the efficiency of the safeguards system; in that connection, 
it had aligned itself with the position of the European Union and had already accepted 
the simplified inspector designation procedure proposed by the Agency, giving 
inspectors free access to its territory. Illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other 
radioactive sources and attempts to transport those materials through its territory were 
a cause of serious concern for Lithuania, which was making every effort to put an end 
to such practices. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 21 

57. Without underestimating other nuclear applications, he wished to highlight the 
paramount importance of electricity production. The amount of overall electricity 
production accounted for by nuclear energy was increasing throughout the world, and 
in a country like Lithuania, it even predominated, representing 85% of the national 
output. Ignalina nuclear power plant, with its two RBMK-type reactors, had a total 
capacity of 2500 MW, and, as Lithuania's primary energy sources were negligible, 
nuclear power was its main energy source. 
58. Experts considered RBMKreactors to be among the most hazardous. Lithuania's 
energy strategy consequently focused on improving safety at Ignalina NPP. An 
extensive safety improvement programme was under way with the assistance of 
several countries, of which Sweden deserved special mention. The European Bank for 
Reconstruction and Development had provided a grant of ECU 33 million for that 
purpose. When the programme was completed, safety at Ignalina NPP would be much 
improved, and Lithuania wished to express its thanks to the countries which had 
provided assistance. At the present time a safety analysis and evaluation exercise was 
being carried out at the power plant and an international expert group would shortly 
be producing a safety analysis report on the basis of which Lithuania's safety 
inspectorate would decide whether or not to grant Ignalina NPP an operating licence. 
The Agency's ASSET and OSART missions had been considered to be particularly 
useful. 
59. ThankstotheAgency'sintensiveeffortstoanalysethesafetyofRBMKreactors, 
experts now had an in-depth knowledge of the characteristics of those reactors, their 
safety systems and their operation. Lithuania's nuclear specialists had benefited from 
Agency financial support to acquire operational experience of nuclear power plants, 
further their knowledge through international workshops and participate in 
conferences or symposia. That co-operation was helping Lithuanian experts to 
evaluate their own problems, and better mutual understanding facilitated co-operation 
with foreign companies and organizations in solving practical nuclear safety issues. 
It should be mentioned in that context that Ignalina had third-generation RBMK 
reactors, which had a much higher safety level than the Soviet designed reactors. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 22 

60. The radioactive waste management issue was becoming increasingly acute in 
Lithuania, particularly in respect of spent fuel. An overall radioactive waste 
management plan had been developed with the assistance of the Swedish company 
SKB and the Agency. Spent fuel would be put in interim storage in containers 
produced by the German company GNB, while the question of final disposal was 
considered. That problem needed to be tackled by countries working together in a coordinated 
manner, as it was neither desirable nor economical for countries to seek 
individual solutions. Lithuania would endeavour to acquire new technologies whilst 
pursuing geological investigations and co-operating with countries whose environment 
and problems were similar. The Agency had taken a welcome initiative in regard to 
the management of radioactive waste from medical, industrial and agricultural 
applications, and similar programmes could usefully be developed for spent fuel 
management. 
61. In conclusion, he noted that Ignalina NPP, which had been a completely closed 
facility, was now more easily accessible. Objective information on the plant could be 
obtained by anyone and an information centre had recently been opened at the site 
itself. He thanked the Secretariat for the mission sent to Lithuania in July 1996, which 
had been greatly appreciated. Lastly, he pointed out that, despite the provisions of the 
Statute requiring staff recruitment to be on as wide a geographical basis as possible, 
Lithuania was still not represented on the Agency's staff. 
62. Ms. MÄKELÄINEN (Finland), welcoming the Republic of Moldova to 
membership of the Agency and associating herself with the statement made by the 
delegate of Ireland on behalf of the European Union, said that Finland looked forward 
to the imminent entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The preparation 
of the convention on the safety of radioactive waste management was progressing 
well, thanks particularly to the efforts of the Chairman of the group of experts drafting 
the text. For its part, Finland felt that the convention should be broad in scope. From 
the safety point of view, it saw no difference between spent fuel considered as waste 
and spent fuel not considered as such, and indeed the convention should cover all 
radioactive waste irrespective of its origin. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 23 

63. The work on revision of the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear 
Damage had reached a stage which allowed some optimism as to its completion in the 
not too distant future. It was to be noted with satisfaction that the Russian Federation 
was in the process of becoming a party to that Convention. 
64. The finalization of the protocol for implementation of Part 2 of Programme 93+2 
was an important task. It involved a series of indispensable measures, the cost of 
which would have to be borne if the nuclear option was to remain viable. Finland 
failed to see what fundamentally new obligations that second set of measures would 
entail for States. After all, it seemed only natural that a non-nuclear-weapon State 
party to the NPT should adhere to its non-proliferation commitments and take all the 
necessary measures to provide assurance that it was not engaged in any undeclared 
nuclear activities. 
65. For the first time for years the budget proposed for 1997 represented real 
growth. Finland had never blindly supported the zero-real-growth principle for the 
Agency's budget, believing that each programme should be examined on its own 
merits and adequately funded after a thorough analysis, taking into account national 
budget constraints. The Secretariat had taken some welcome measures for reviewing 
the Agency's programme, for example having the programme of the new Department 
of Nuclear Safety examined by an advisory group. The same should be done for the 
nuclear power programme as well as all other programmes, in order to identify the 
programme components which had run their course or which no longer fell within the 
Agency's mandate. Gradual phasing-out of such activities would make room for new 
priority activities without increasing the overall budget. That exercise should be 
undertaken on the new biennial programme for 1999-2000, preparation of which 
would commence in 1997. 
66. The Agency should seek to collaborate more with other international 
organizations, in particular those concerned with nuclear safety, such as the Nuclear 
Energy Agency of the OECD and the European Union. Each international organization 
had its own mandate in serving countries with specific common interests. By 
collaborating more together, those organizations could assist each other in their tasks. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 24 

In any case they would all be drawing on the same limited expert resources in 
Member States. In conclusion, she congratulated the Director General and the 
Secretariat on the work accomplished in not always easy circumstances and assured 
them of her country's continued support in their task. 

67. Mr. BULACAMACHO(Colombia), havingwelcomedMoldovatotheAgency, 
said that the fortieth session of the Agency's General Conference was taking place at 
a crucial time in international politics, marked by the departure from the old two-bloc 
system. The General Conference was especially important to Colombia for two 
reasons, firstly on account of the country's tremendous energy potential and, secondly 
on account of its outstanding biodiversity. Pointing to the correlation between 
international peace and the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, he highlighted the role 
played by the Agency, particularly with regard to safeguards. With respect to present 
moves to strengthen the effectiveness and improve the efficiency of the safeguards 
system, he hoped that the work of the committee established in that connection would 
result in an increase in the Agency's authority. 
68. In Colombia nuclear energy had always been used for peaceful purposes, in 
such fields as medicine and scientific research. Colombia had always complied 
faithfully with its treaty obligations and with the Agency's recommendations, as 
exemplified by the fact that it had just returned some highly enriched fuel to its 
country of origin, thereby becoming the second Latin American country to successfully 
complete such an operation. 
69. Colombia appreciated the support given by the Agency to the Colombian 
Institute of Nuclear Affairs in the handling of radioactive waste and the design of 
radiation protection systems. With regard to radioactive waste storage, his delegation 
considered that the Agency needed to plan well ahead with a view to providing 
Member States with concrete recommendations. 
70. The peaceful uses of nuclear energy should be directed to promoting equality 
of States, rather than serving to further widen the gap separating North and South. 
There was a collective responsibility to ensure that they did not become a new 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 25 

element in world domination. In that connection, he made special mention of the 
Agency's support for ARCAL, which served to strengthen and co-ordinate the peaceful 
uses of atomic energy in Latin America. Similarly, Colombia commended the Agency's 
activities to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources 
and stressed the fundamental role of training in that regard. 

71. Colombia welcomed the imminent entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety and strongly supported the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the more 
especially as its constitution made it illegal to manufacture, import, possess or use 
chemical, biological and nuclear weapons, or to bring nuclear waste into Colombia, 
and as it was a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty. The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty should, of course, have been adopted long ago even though it could not prevent 
countries with very advanced technologies from continuing testing by means of 
simulation. What mankind really needed was a commitment to complete nuclear 
disarmament. 
72. From the conclusions of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage 
it seemed that agreement was close on that matter, which was of such importance to 
all Member States of the Agency. The same applied to the negotiations concerning 
radioactive waste management. On a different topic, he emphasized the importance 
of projects aimed at producing potable water economically and the use of isotope 
hydrology for water resources management. 
73. In conclusion, he said that the Agency had an important role to play in the 
establishmentofaninternationalenvironmentalpolicy. Statesandnationswouldneed 
to work together to appreciate the ethical and ecological dimensions of the problem. 
Ethical values were based on respect for nature and an ecological vision was important 
for meeting the challenges of international politics. 
74. Mr. VOSKANIAN (Armenia) noted that since his country had joined the 
Agency in 1993, fruitful co-operation had developed between it and the Agency. 
Through its reliability, dynamism and effective management the Agency had gained 
a very positive reputation in Armenia. Co-operation with the Agency, an important 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 26 

source of science and technology, ensured that nuclear science was used purely for 
peaceful purposes and as a catalyst for scientific and technological development in 
general. 

75. Armenia supported the Agency's activities aimed at strengthening the 
effectiveness ofthe safeguards system, and also the work ofthe committee responsible 
for preparing an additional protocol to safeguards agreements concluded between 
Member States and the Agency in connection with the NPT. Member States should 
strongly support the important projects initiated by the Agency. Stronger global and 
national measures were needed to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and 
to guarantee their safe storage and disposal. The Agency's safeguards were an 
integral part of the international non-proliferation regime and the Agency continued 
to play a vital role in the implementation of the NPT. 
76. His Government reiterated its gratitude to the Agency for the considerable 
assistance it had provided both before and after the restart of the Medzamor nuclear 
power plant. It also appreciated the enormous effort by specialists from many 
countries who had visited the plant and provided valuable advice. 
77. The Armenian Government was committed to nuclear safety and in particular 
to applying the highest standards of safety to the Medzamor plant using all the 
resources at its disposal. It had allocated the necessary funds for implementing the 
most important and urgent safety measures. To ensure strict observance of safety 
standards and upgrading, the President of the Republic of Armenia had appointed an 
independent international advisory body, the Nuclear Safety Council, composed of 
experts of world repute, to advise him directly on safety measures and regulations at 
Medzamor. The urgent problem of safety at the plant required that the Government 
take steps to improve the capabilities of the national nuclear regulatory body. To 
ensure the effectiveness of that body, the Government had increased the number of 
its staff to 22 in 1996 and provided it with every assistance to carry out its activities. 
The Agency had lent valuable assistance to the Armenian nuclear regulatory body in 
the following spheres: safety assessment of the plant, seismic safety evaluation, 
reactor vessel stability, safety evaluation of other technical features of the plant, 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 27 

management of the nuclear sector in Armenia, fire safety and site security, emergency 
planning, radiation monitoring system, seismic monitoring system, and organization of 
training courses, scientific visits and seminars. 

78. The Agency was continuing to provide support to Armenia on maintenance, 
infrastructure development and training. The assistance programme to strengthen 
radiation protection and radioactive waste safety was also under way. The success of 
the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation programme meant that Armenia 
was gradually approaching international standards. As an aid to transparency, 
Armenia's Permanent Mission had submitted to the Agency a detailed report on the 
recommissioning of unit 2 of the Medzamor plant. The main conclusion of that report 
was that over the whole operating period there had been no problems or incidents 
that could affect the radiation situation in or around the plant. 
79. Despite Armenia's energy difficulties and the fact that unit 2 of the Medzamor 
plant had been restarted under extreme conditions, the Armenian Government did not 
intend to keep the unit operating in the long term. Medzamor would remain in service 
until other energy sources had been put in place, which would probably be around the 
year 2004. 
80. In conclusion, he reiterated his Government's commitment to continue 
developing the power sector by means of conventional sources in conjunction with 
energy conservation. 
81. Mr. AL-BOUANIN (Qatar), welcoming the admission of Moldova to the 
Agency, said that his country, convinced of the importance of the nuclear nonproliferation 
regime and of the need for all States to accede to the NPT, in particular 
all countries of the Middle East region without exception, urged Member States of the 
Agency to further assist the Director General in pursuing consultations with the 
countries of the Middle East with a view to achieving full application of the safeguards 
system and submitting all the nuclear facilities of the region to Agency safeguards. 
The conclusion of an agreement establishing a zone free of nuclear weapons and other 
weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East would serve to create a climate of 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 28 

mutual confidence and promote the peace process, thus paving the way for the 
establishment of general, just and lasting peace in the Middle East. 

82. Nuclear safety, reactor operating safety and radioactive waste management 
safety were undoubtedly among the most important tasks facing the Agency. In that 
respect Qatar welcomed the imminent entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety. All the same, the Agency's role should not be limited to those aspects. The 
Agency had been set up to serve developing countries and assist them with technology 
transfer to enable them to benefit from the peaceful applications of nuclear energy in 
such fields as agriculture, health, environmental protection and food preservation. In 
that connection, Qatar attached great importance to projects for supplying the people 
of arid zones with water and hoped that the Agency would play an effective role in 
the use of nuclear techniques for exploiting underground water resources. It was 
important that the technical and economic evaluation studies being conducted by the 
Agency with a view to the implementation of projects to construct ecologically 
compatible and economically competitive nuclear desalination facilities should 
ultimately produce tangible results. 
83. As regards technical assistance, close examination of the sums allocated to the 
Middle East region showed that the share of the countries of that region was very 
modest. The Agency should give more attention to technical co-operation projects 
with the countries of the region and strengthen and co-ordinate them to match 
national development plans. The Agency should also provide training opportunities 
and fellowships to enable those countries to acquire the necessary capacities in the 
field of peaceful application of nuclear energy. To that end, Qatar urged all Member 
States, in particular the industrialized countries, to fulfil the commitments they had 
undertaken with regard to the financing of Agency technical assistance activities and 
technology transfer. 
84. Mr. HASHIM (Malaysia), havingwelcomedMoldovatomembershipofthe 
Agency, said that his delegation had listened with appreciation to the Director 
General's comprehensive and informative statement; it was gratifying to note that, 
despite resource limitations, the Agency's activities had expanded. He was confident 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 29 

that the Agency would in future play a still greater role in meeting the needs of its 
Member States. 

85. Malaysia had just adopted its seventh five-year plan, which covered the 
period 1996-2000 and provided -inter alia -for an improvement of the country's 
science and technology base, including increased investment in the training of highlevel 
scientific and technical personnel. The plan contained proposals for achieving 
sustainable development through private-sector participation in the development of 
science and technology, the nurturing of domestic innovations and inventions, and 
closerco-operation amongresearchagencies, industrialestablishmentsanduniversities 
at the national and the international level. Local research and development (R&D) was 
to be directed in particular towards increasing the value added to local raw materials, 
and there was to be a shift in the emphasis on research and development towards 
achieving increases in productivity. 
86. In the country's 1996 budget, the IRPA (Intensification of Research in Priority 
Areas)programmes forR&Dfunding had been restructured in ordertokeep pace with 
the growing needs of the national economy, and about 10% of the funds in question 
had been allocated to R&D relating to nuclear and associated technologies. To 
encourage R&D that was oriented towards the end-user and to strengthen the links 
between public-sector institutions and industry, a contract research system and R&D 
syndication would be introduced. 
87. The seventh five-year plan would in particular focus on ensuring adequate, 
secure and economic energy supplies through the efficient utilization of energy 
resources while preserving the environment. The security of supplies would continue 
to be pursued through the diversification of energy sources, with recourse to natural 
gas, petroleum, hydropower and coal. Although nuclear power generation was still 
only an option, there was a growing recognition of the role of non-power nuclear 
science and technology in development. 
88. Malaysia would continue to participate actively in international co-operation and 
would intensify its efforts at the bilateral, regional and multilateral levels. Areas such 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 30 

as science and technology, technical education and information technology would play 
a greater role in the improvement of productivity and competitiveness. Also, the plan 
provided for an expansion ofMalaysia's technicalco-operation programme through the 
inclusion of activities with emphasis on human resources development. Co-operation 
with developed countries would be strengthened, but efforts would also be made to 
promote self-reliance among countries of the South. 

89. The activities being conducted within the framework of RCA had led to the 
establishment of strong regional institutional networks which constituted a proven 
mechanism for co-ordinated technology transfer and absorption at the regional level. 
It was therefore not surprising that in 1995 the Joint Inspection Unit had rated the 
RCA/UNDP industrial programme the most successful regional programme in the region 
of Asia and the Pacific. Also, it was encouraging to note that that programme had 
received the best rating ever awarded by the Joint Inspection Unit. 
90. On the subject of nuclear-weapon-free zones, he said that his delegation 
applauded the signing, on 11 April 1996, of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
Treaty. The Treaty on the South East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, which had 
been signed on 15 December 1995, required its parties to conclude with the Agency 
agreements for the application of NPT-type safeguards. Also, it contained provisions 
relating to important issues ranging from nuclear safety to nuclear supply conditions. 
In particular, it required that the peaceful nuclear activities conducted within the zone 
covered by it be the subject of safety assessments conforming to Agency guidelines 
and standards. As part of the control system, provision had been made for fact-finding 
missions to be carried out by Agency inspectors. Malaysia was hopeful that the 
nuclear-weapon States would accede to the Protocol to the Treaty in order to further 
promote the development of the nuclear non-proliferation regime and ensure peace 
and security within the South East Asia region and in the world at large. 

91. As regards the adoption, on 9 and 10 September 1996, of the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT) by the United Nations General Assembly, Malaysia 
believed that, despite its shortcomings, the CTBT would, by at least banning nuclear 
tests, encourage the international community to engage in more serious efforts directed 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 31 

towards nuclear disarmament. Nevertheless, some legitimate concerns had not been 
adequately covered in the CTBT. For example, it did not contain a clear commitment 
of States to the total elimination of nuclear weapons within a specified timeframe; also, 
it left the door open for forms of testing such as laboratory simulations. 

92. His delegation welcomed the conclusion of a safeguards agreement between 
Chile and the Agency pursuant to the NPT and the Tlatelolco Treaty. It also welcomed 
the conclusion of an NPT safeguards agreement with the Czech Republic. 
93. As in the past, Malaysia had been paying its Regular Budget contributions in full 
and in a timely manner. Its contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund (TCF) 
were in line with the amounts calculated on the basis of the TCF targets. Malaysia 
would continue to pay its contributions and would like to see all other Member States 
fulfilling their obligations promptly. 
94. Malaysia endorsed the Annual Report and the Agency's accounts for 1995. The 
improved format and content of the Annual Report were most welcome. As to the 
Agency's accounts for 1995, his delegation noted that the performance of the 
Department of Technical Co-operation had been particularly remarkable, new records 
being set for financial implementation and technical assistance delivery. However, the 
efforts to reduce the amount of unobligated resources should not be allowed to lead 
to less prudent budget management. As regards expenditures on equipment and 
experts, hisdelegationwouldliketheSecretariattopaydueattentiontotherecommendation resulting 
from the audit of the 1995 accounts -that it broaden the Agency's 
procurement and recruitment activities and have greater recourse to suppliers and 
experts in developing countries; such suppliers and experts might well prove more 
cost-effective, especially if used within their regions. 

95. As regards strengthening the Agency's technical co-operation activities, his 
delegation continued to support the "Partnership in Development" idea. Also, Malaysia 
appreciated the work being done by SAGTAC, particularly in elaborating -for the 
Department of Technical Co-operation -an overall strategy for the effective and 
efficient transfer of nuclear and associated techniques. Malaysia supported the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 32 

initiative of the Department of Technical Co-operation directed towards encouraging 
and promoting technical co-operation among developing countries (TCDC) at the 
regional and the interregional level. Malaysia was playing only a modest role in the 
field of nuclear science and technology as regards both achievements and resources, 
but the expertise acquired by it in some non-power nuclear sectors could be used in 
establishing a link between more advanced countries and countries whose 
infrastructures for applications of isotopes and radiation were less developed. 

96. In 1996 Malaysia had for the first time hosted a meeting of an Agency expert 
advisory group and also the Second International Symposium on the Radiation 
Vulcanization of Natural Rubber Latex. The two events had proved very successful, and 
Malaysia was grateful to the Agency for having given it the opportunity to organize 
them and looked forward to hosting further such events. 
97. Lastly, Malaysia had taken note of the recommendation regarding the adoption 
of the revised Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material and also the 
fact that the Convention on Nuclear Safety would shortly be entering into force which 
would help to enhance safety in the utilization of nuclear energy. 
98. Mr. de OURO-PRETO (Brazil) said that, as part of its confidence-building 
efforts, the Brazilian Government had adopted various important measures in a number 
of areas, particularly the nuclear field. For example, the quadripartite agreement with 
Argentina, ABACC and the IAEA had entered into force and Brazil had ratified the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. In addition, it had become a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group 
at a plenary meeting held in Buenos Aires in April 1995. 
99. Although Brazil considered international treaties and conventions to be the most 
appropriate basis for its non-proliferation policy, it believed that some informal export 
control schemes could also be useful for preventing proliferation, thanks to the 
speedier means of communication and simpler co-ordinating mechanisms involved. 
However, informal mechanisms such as the Nuclear Suppliers Group needed to become 
more transparent and predictable in their actions so as to make them better able to 
attract new members and contribute to a safer world. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 33 

100. Still in the field of non-proliferation, in particular the strengthening of the 
Agency's safeguards system, his delegation was pleased that the Brazilian proposal for 
a working group to be set up to study the implementation of Programme 93+2 had 
finally taken shape in the form of a committee to negotiate the necessary protocol. The 
committee was a good way to encourage wide participation by Agency Member States 
in the discussion of vital measures involving a change in the strategy of the safeguards 
system, whereby it would no longer focus on nuclear material but on equipment and 
facilities, whether nuclear material was present or not. Nevertheless, his delegation 
was concerned that the measures proposed in Programme 93+2 could lead to 
increased discrimination between countries with comprehensive safeguards 
agreements -which offered the most complete and effective guarantees of nonproliferation 
-and the nuclear-weapon States and States with INFCIRC/66-type 
agreements, which would be largely unaffected by the proposed measures. The 
possibility of obtaining more information on nuclear exports by nuclear-weapon States 
would hardly alleviate such discrimination, and as for countries which were subject 
only to partial safeguards, no specific measure had yet been put forward to cater for 
their participation in Programme 93+2. 
101. Still on discrimination in the implementation of safeguards, Brazil felt that the 
measures finally approved under Programme 93+2 should only enter into force after 
a large number of countries had adopted them. That would avoid a situation in which 
some countries had more obligations than others, not to mention the additional 
financial and administrative burdens that the measures would impose on the 
governments which adopted them. 
102. Another vital point, still unresolved, was the need to protect the legitimate 
commercial and technological interests of Member States in the face of expanded 
access to information and extended access to sites and locations. The same applied 
as far as the constitutional rights of the countries with comprehensive safeguards 
agreements were concerned. In that regard, the Brazilian Government believed that 
the staff of the Secretariat should be made subject to a more rigorous system of 
responsibility in implementing the new safeguards measures. Such a system would 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 34 

counterbalance the increased powers and greater access to information that the 
Agency's staff would certainly enjoy if Programme 93+2 was approved. Brazil hoped 
that significant progress could be achieved on all the outstanding issues concerning 
the strengthening of safeguards during the next session of the committee. 

103. NotingthatABACCwasimprovingitstechnicalcapacityandgraduallyacquiring 
greater credibility, not only at the regional but also at the international level, he said 
he was convinced that ABACC could further enhance confidence in the international 
safeguards system, in which the Agency played a central role. Improved co-ordination 
between the Agency and ABACCwould also strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency 
of safeguards in Brazil and Argentina. 
104. Brazil welcomed the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
which, although not perfect, could contribute to the non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons and help the disarmament cause. He reiterated his delegation's support for 
the adoption of a cut-off treaty to halt the production of highly enriched uranium and 
plutonium for the manufacture of explosive devices. 
105. Turning to nuclear safety and the establishment of an international safety 
culture, he recalled that his delegation had played an active role in the negotiation of 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety and had signed the document on the day it was 
opened for signature at the Agency. Brazil was therefore pleased that the required 
conditions had been met for the Convention to enter into force on 24 October 1996. 
In that regard, he reported that the Convention had been approved by the Lower 
Chamber of the Brazilian Congress on 4 July 1996 and that it should shortly be passed 
by the Senate. 
106. Clearly, much remained to be done in order to apply that important Convention, 
including negotiating the Rules of Procedure and the Financial Rules, an exercise to 
which Brazil hoped to contribute. The most important thing was to establish a sound 
set of rules in strict conformity with the spirit and the letter of the Convention. It was 
to be hoped that the consensus document containing clarifications on that subject 
which was annexed to the Final Act of the diplomatic conference which had adopted 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 35 

the Convention would be duly taken into consideration when the Rules were 
negotiated. 

107. Turning to the question of the international liability regime and the work of the 
Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage, the Brazilian Government noted 
with satisfaction that substantial progress had been achieved on revising the Vienna 
Convention, although some worrying trends were apparent, such as a certain 
resistance to the updating of parts of the text, and the attempts being made by certain 
countries (most of which were not parties to the Convention) to increase excessively 
the amounts of compensation. Such increases could have a serious impact on the final 
cost of nuclear power which might prevent developing countries from acceding to the 
revised Convention. 
108. The Brazilian delegation was also concerned at the pace of the negotiations on 
a supplementary funding convention. It had to be recognized that progress hitherto 
had been insufficient, and that no consensus had yet been reached on certain basic 
questions. If that situation persisted after the following session of the Standing 
Committee in October, his delegation proposed that a conference devoted solely to 
revision of the Vienna Convention be held without delay. It was important not to 
hamper progress on the vital and urgent issue of liability for nuclear damage, and the 
Standing Committee's mandate actually authorized such a solution. The question of 
supplementary funding could then be discussed at another diplomatic conference, if 
necessary. His delegation continued to prefer a regional solution which took into 
account the characteristics of the countries of each region. Such a solution, compatible 
with other systems having the same purpose, would be fairer and more efficient, and 
would enable a greater number of Member States to support the idea of supplementary 
funding. 
109. Afurther vital element in the global nuclear safety strategy was the convention 
on the safety of radioactive waste management, currently being negotiated. Brazil 
would like the text to be adopted promptly and to retain its incentive character, as in 
the case of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The mandate for the negotiation of the 
Convention should be adhered to, in that its scope should remain limited to the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 36 

management of nuclear waste and not be extended to include other materials not 
originally foreseen. Following the convention on radioactive waste, it was desirable 
to negotiate other conventions dealing with other aspects of the nuclear fuel cycle. 
A series of conventions on nuclear safety would help ensure a better safety culture 
worldwide. 

110. Since it attached great importance to the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities, his Government was concerned at the suggestion that allocations oftechnical 
co-operation resources be geared to Member States' contributions to the TCF. Brazil 
was opposed to the idea, not only because the TCF was a voluntary fund, which made 
the proposal in question illogical, but also because it had never been approved by the 
General Conference. Also with regard to technical co-operation, Brazil reaffirmed its 
support for maintaining a balance between safeguards and non-safeguards activities, 
a concept enshrined in a General Conference resolution. 
111. In the context of its own technical co-operation activities, Brazil had increased 
its already significant co-operation with Argentina in the nuclear field. On the basis 
of a joint declaration by the Brazilian and Argentine Presidents, the two countries had 
signed an agreement on improving co-operation in areas such as social applications 
of nuclear energy, nuclear safety and the nuclear fuel cycle. 
112. Lastly, with regard to the revision of Article VI of the Statute, his delegation 
could support an enlargement of the Board of Governors to take account of the 
legitimate demands of Member States wishing to participate more in its decisions. 
However, any proposals to that effect had to respect certain principles, such as that of 
geographical balance. It was also essential that Latin America's position relative to the 
other regions did not suffer. 
113. Mr. MAYRHOFER-GRÜNBÜHEL (Austria), having expressed support for the 
statement made by the delegate of Ireland on behalf of the European Union and 
welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a new member of the Agency, said that the 
START I and II treaties and the START III treaty to be negotiated in the near future, the 
indefinite extension of the NPT, the measures agreed at the Moscow Nuclear Safety 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 37 

and Security Summit, the imminent entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety, the negotiations on a waste management convention, the prospective cut-off 
convention on the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons, negotiations on 
the strengthening of the safeguards system under Programme 93+2 and the opening 
for signature of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty demonstrated the 
increased convergence of international concerns. 

114. The NPT Review and Extension Conference showed that the international 
community's desire to guard against the possible risks associated with peaceful nuclear 
activities prevailed over other considerations. States should therefore be able to cooperate 
and co-ordinate their activities in accordance with the existing nonproliferation 
regime. That co-ordination effort should not in any way hamper or 
restrict technical co-operation for peaceful purposes, rather it should help to achieve 
the common objective of a world rid once and for all of the threat of nuclear 
confrontation. In that regard, the Austrian Government welcomed the substantial 
progress made by the Canberra Commission, which would undoubtedly make a lasting 
contribution to the discussion of nuclear disarmament questions. 
115. Recalling with satisfaction that the CTBTO was to have its headquarters in 
Vienna, he stressed the importance of the CTBT for nuclear arms control and said that 
only a truly worldwide application of the Treaty involving all the major actors would 
enable the international community to move a further step along the road towards the 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons. The conclusion of a cut-off convention on 
weapons-grade fissile material production would be another important step in 
strengthening the non-proliferation regime. 
116. Austria, like other countries had experienced a number of attempts at illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials. Efficient national systems were essential for the 
effective control of transboundary movements of nuclear materials, but it was also vital 
to establish international co-operation between the competent national authorities. 
117. The work to strengthen the safeguards system was extremely important and 
very timely. Welcoming the Safeguards Statement in the Safeguards Implementation 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 38 

Report for 1995 and commending the effectiveness with which the Agency had carried 
out its task, he pledged his country's full support for Programme 93+2 and expressed 
the hope that the outstanding issues such as universality and confidentiality would be 
satisfactorily resolved, so that the work could be swiftly concluded. 

118. The Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage had achieved a 
breakthrough at its fifteenth session. Not only had progress been made in finding a 
comprehensive solution to certain basic and institutional questions related to the 
liability regime, but the negotiations on the conclusion of a supplementary funding 
convention also looked promising. The complex issue of the payments that States 
parties to the new convention would have to make in a case of liability had been 
examined in detail. There were expectations that the negotiations could be concluded 
at the Committee's next session. 
119. In view of the proximity of nuclear activities to its borders, Austria supported the 
strengthening of the safety of nuclear reactors in general, but maintained that 
improvements in safety standards should not lead to an extension of the scheduled 
lifetime of reactors. Recognizing the importance of the Agency's extrabudgetary 
programme on the safety of WWER nuclear power plants, Austria had made financial 
and in-kind contributions thereto and was willing to do so in future. In view of the 
programme's importance, Austria believed that it should be incorporated in the Regular 
Budget. The Agency should also look at reactors of older design, particularly since of 
the 430 nuclear power plants currently operating in the world, some 70 of them would 
have completed 30 years of operation by the year 2000 and therefore reached the end 
of their service life. Austria would welcome any proposals by the Agency on the 
systematic decommissioning of nuclear power plants which had reached the end of 
their service life. Austria attached great importance to the Agency's activities related 
to the preparation of legally binding international instruments to ensure a high level 
of nuclear safety worldwide. It would participate actively in peer reviews of safety. 
The Convention on Nuclear Safety was an important model for the preparation of other 
conventions, the aim of which should be to ensure that all activities of the nuclear fuel 
cycle were subject to appropriate international safety regulations. Austria welcomed 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 39 

the progress on negotiations on a draft convention on radioactive waste management 
and hoped that the diplomatic conference for its adoption would be held in 1997. 

120. With respect to international co-operation in the peaceful use of nuclear energy, 
the technical co-operation activities co-ordinated by the Agency constituted one of the 
most important elements without being a goal in itself. The activities carried out in 
areas such as medicine, agriculture and water resources should be evaluated in terms 
of their overall impact on mankind and the environment and should also be seen in 
the context of Agenda 21. The new approach based on thematic planning was a 
welcome initiative which should enable the Agency to assess the overall impact of all 
the relevant activities. 
121. Mr. COOK (New Zealand), after welcoming Moldova's admission to the 
Agency, said that no effort should be spared to bring to a positive conclusion the work 
of the Committee on Strengthening the Effectiveness and Improving the Efficiency of 
the Safeguards System so that the draft protocol could be adopted in December 1996. 
New Zealand considered that the current version of the draft was a sound and effective 
package of measures, and that no changes should be made which might have the 
effect of weakening them. In that regard, his delegation congratulated the Secretariat 
on having prepared balanced and mature proposals. The Agency's capacity to detect 
any undeclared nuclear activities was essential to its credibility and indeed a 
precondition for a reliable non-proliferation regime. His delegation was convinced 
that, taken as a whole, the Part 1 and Part 2 measures of Programme 93+2 would 
strengthen that capacity considerably. The latest revelations about Iraq's clandestine 
nuclear programme were a reminder that the issue was not simply a theoretical one. 
122. In the Asia and Pacific region, the DPRK remained a source of concern. New 
Zealand urged the DPRK to return to full compliance with the provisions of its 
safeguards agreement, which remained in force and legally binding. New Zealand 
fully supported the Framework Agreement as an important contribution to regional and 
international security, and looked to the DPRK to co-operate fully with the Agency in 
monitoring the freeze on its nuclear activities. New Zealand was concerned that the 
technical consultations between the DPRK and the Agency had made only limited 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 40 

progress, and hoped that there would be no further delay in implementation of the 
measures to preserve the information required for verification of past nuclear activities. 

123. The indefinite extension of the NPT was a major advance in nuclear nonproliferation. 
The enhanced NPT review process would begin in 1997, and it would 
be important for the Agency to have met the expectations of the 1995 NPT Review and 
Extension Conference by effectively strengthening the safeguards system. However, 
the Agency's input did not stop there, and the Secretariat and the Member States 
would once again be examiningthe implementation ofArticles IIIand IVofthe Treaty. 
His delegation looked forward to co-operating with other Member States in the threeyear 
review process. 
124. One of the major commitments undertaken at the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference was to step up the efforts to put an end to nuclear testing, and New 
Zealand attached high priority to the entry into force of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-
Ban Treaty, which had been adopted by an overwhelming majority. That was 
a historic achievement, and the Agency would have an important contribution to make 
to the implementation of the Treaty. 
125. New Zealand attached particular importance to the study being carried out by 
an International Advisory Committee on the radiological situation on Mururoa and 
Fangataufa Atolls. The potential long-term environmental effects of nuclear testing in 
the region had for many years been a matter of the gravest concern to New Zealand 
and the other members of the South Pacific Forum. Accordingly, New Zealand was 
participating in the activities of the Committee and its task forces and working groups, 
and New Zealand laboratories were involved in analysing samples taken from the 
Atolls. He thanked the Agency for its support, and expressed the hope that the 
objective and detailed study, carried out with the full co-operation of the French 
authorities, would make it possible to determine the effects of past nuclear testing. 
126. New Zealand welcomed the signature of the Protocols to the Rarotonga Treaty 
by the three nuclear-weapon States that had not already signed, which provided 
assurance that there would never again be nuclear testing in the South Pacific. His 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 41 

delegation wished to take the opportunity to congratulate the African countries on the 
conclusion of the Pelindaba Treaty and the countries of South East Asia on the signing 
of the Bangkok Treaty. Clearly, it was now time to examine means of developing cooperation 
between the members of nuclear-weapon-free zones. 

127. Welcoming the imminent entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, 
he said that marine transportation of nuclear material in the South Pacific was causing 
concern to many countries of the region. The Heads of Government of the South 
Pacific Forum countries had reiterated, at their summit meeting on 3-5 September, that 
such shipments should be made in accordance with the most rigorous international 
safety standards. His delegation took note of the Board's adoption of the revised 
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, and endorsed the Agency's 
intention to keep the Regulations under constant review. Likewise, he welcomed the 
progress made in the negotiations on a convention on the safety of radioactive waste 
management, and emphasized the importance of bringing the negotiations on revision 
of the Vienna Convention to a speedy conclusion. 
128. With regard to technical co-operation, his delegation reaffirmed its support for 
the RCA. New Zealand intended to make a further extrabudgetary contribution for 
1997 to the Joint UNDP/RCA/IAEA project. In view of the important contribution that 
project was making tothe exchange ofnuclear-related technicalexperience at regional 
level, the Agency should assign it high priority. 
129. In conclusion, he said that for the first time New Zealand was seeking election 
to a seat on the Board of Governors, as it considered that the Agency's activities, 
particularly in the area of non-proliferation, were becoming increasingly relevant to 
all countries, especially those like New Zealand which did not have a major nuclear 
industry. New Zealand thanked the Member States of the South East Asia and Pacific 
group for their support. 
130. Mr. FISENKA (Belarus), after welcoming the Republic of Moldova to the 
Agency, said that October 1996 would mark the fortieth anniversary of the adoption 
of the Agency's Statute. During that period, the Agency had endeavoured to achieve 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 42 

its main statutory objective, which was the earliest and widest possible use of atomic 
energy to promote peace, health and prosperity in the world. The commemorative 
nature of the current session offered an opportunity for reflection on what had been 
accomplished, and what remained to be accomplished to promote common security 
and to prevent the spread of nuclear weapons. It could now be stated with assurance 
that the Agency had proved itself capable of controlling impartially and effectively 
substances which ranked amongthe mostdangerous formankind, namelynuclearmaterial. 

131. Belarus, which was pursuing a policy of reduction and complete elimination of 
nuclear weapons, fully supported the world nuclear-weapon non-proliferation regime 
and the complete banning of nuclear tests. It had voted for the United Nations General 
Assembly resolution approving the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and was 
ready to sign it in the near future. 
132. Having renounced the right to keep the nuclear weapons it had inherited from 
the Soviet Union, and while it awaited an appropriate response from other countries 
in the region, Belarus had been seriously concerned recently by the possibility that 
such weapons could be deployed near its borders. With a view to contributing to the 
strengthening of non-proliferation, peace, security and stability in the region, it had 
suggested the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central and Eastern 
Europe. Belarus was of the opinion that such a zone should be multilateral, i.e. that 
a group of States in the region should participate and, moreover, that it should be 
integral. The treaty establishing that nuclear-weapon-free zone should also provide 
for the accession of nuclear powers which would undertake not to deploy nuclear 
weapons inside the zone. The Government of Belarus felt that the unique situation in 
Central and Eastern Europe at present made that idea particularly relevant, and 
created favourable conditions for its implementation. Belarus was currently holding 
consultations on that important issue with countries which it thought might join the 
zone. It intended to work progressively towards that objective, taking into account the 
strategic interests of the countries concerned, and being careful not to compromise 
security and stability on the European continent. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 43 

133. Belarus hoped that the proposal to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central 
and Eastern Europe would be well received by countries in the region and the Agency. 
It greatly appreciated the Agency's efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in 
various regions of the world. Thanks to the practical experience which had been 
gained, and the legal infrastructure which had been established in existing nuclearweapon-
free zones, the Agency could offer valuable consultative services for the 
elaboration of the necessary legal documents and thereafter assist in the multilateral 
negotiations with all interested States. 
134. The Government of Belarus supported the Agency's efforts to increase the 
effectiveness of its safeguards system. As was well known, nuclear material 
accountancy was one of the cornerstones of that system. Belarus was in the process 
of setting up a nuclear material accountancy and control system which met the 
Agency's requirements, and he took that opportunity of thanking the United States, 
Sweden and Japan for the technical and financial assistance they had given to Belarus 
in that regard. Thanks to that assistance, which had been co-ordinated by the 
Agency, considerable progress had been made during the preceding year in installing 
the necessary technical infrastructure. 
135. Belarus welcomed the measures to strengthen the existing safeguards system 
which were being proposed by the Agency under Programme 93+2. It recognized the 
need to implement the suggested measures and was aware that it would have to take 
the relevant political, legal and technical decisions. With regard to the legal aspect, 
national law would need to be revised. On the technical level, the Agency would have 
to bear in mind that certain countries, including Belarus, would not be a position to 
carry out by themselves all the tasks ensuing from the adoption of Programme 93+2. 
From an analysis by experts in Belarus it was clear that the country would require 
additional technical assistance to implement the programme, in particular for training 
and retraining of staff. 
136. Recalling the valuable results of the co-operation between Belarus and the 
Agency over the preceding four years, he noted that solid and fruitful contacts had 
been established which augured well for a further strengthening of ties in the future. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 44 

137. Belarus was very appreciative of the Agency's new initiative to provide 
additional technical assistance within the framework of the 1997-1998 regional cooperation 
programme. Moreover, it welcomed the measures being taken by the 
Agency Secretariat to implement the Model Project "Upgrading Radiation Protection 
Infrastructure" in Belarus. His country appreciated the flexibility shown by the Agency 
in taking account of its national interests. The Agency's new policy would not only 
facilitate closer and more fruitful co-operation with Belarus but would also promote 
contacts with other countries in the region. 
138. In 1996, Belarus and the world community had commemorated the tenth 
anniversary of the greatest technological disaster of the twentieth century, the 
Chernobyl accident, which had affected vast areas and millions of people, had caused 
large-scale contamination of the environment, had had a devastating effect on the 
development of the affected regions, and had resulted in an increase in social and 
psychological tensions. Without any exaggeration, Chernobyl had become a national 
tragedy for Belarus. Unfortunately, it had to be recorded that the country was having 
to rely principally on its own resources to deal with the consequences of the accident. 
At the same time, it was common knowledge that Chernobyl was a long-term problem 
of unprecedented complexity which could be dealt with successfully only through a 
united effort by the whole world community. 
139. At the end of 1995 and during 1996, a number of important international 
activities had been organized to mark the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl accident. 
International meetings had made it possible to conduct an accurate assessment of the 
situation ten years after the accident, as well as to make a quantitative and qualitative 
analysis of the assistance which had been provided and the investigations which had 
been carried out. Those meetings had shown clearly that there was a need for 
increased assistance to vast groups of people in Belarus, Ukraine and Russia, as well 
as for new research into the consequences of the accident. Belarus was very grateful 
to the European Commission, the IAEA, WHO, UNESCO, FAO and other international 
organizations for organizing those meetings. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 45 

140. It was also grateful to the Director General of the Agency, the Secretary-General 
of the United Nations, the Irish delegation which had spoken on behalf of the 
European Union, the Ukrainian delegation and others for having once again drawn the 
attention of the participants at the General Conference to the extreme importance of 
the problems surrounding Chernobyl. 
141. The international conference "One Decade After Chernobyl: Summing up the 
Consequences of the Accident" which had been held in Vienna, and which had been 
attended by representatives of 71 countries, had summarized the work of numerous 
organizations in various fields following the accident, and had examined the 
knowledge and experience that had been gathered. Without wishing in any way to 
depreciate the approaches used by the Conference to evaluate the consequences ofthe 
accident, or its recommendations and forecasts, he wished to draw attention to the 
appeasing tone of certain passages of the final document and the rather cautious and 
sometimes sceptical attitude towards the statistics collected in the three countries 
which had suffered most from the Chernobyl accident. 
142. AttentiontotheconsequencesofChernobylshouldnotberelaxedbecausethose 
consequences were more extensive and long-lasting than had been thought. In that 
regard, he noted that the Secretary-General of the United Nations had concluded that 
assistance to the population of the affected States needed to be intensified, and he also 
acknowledged with gratitude the energetic appeal for international solidarity with the 
victims of Chernobyl which had been made by Pope John Paul II. 
143. No one could feel entirely safe from accidents like Chernobyl. Mankind had to 
have the necessary knowledge and experience to minimize the negative effects of such 
accidents. Belarus scientists and specialists were constantly studying the situation in 
the affected areas. Using all the data collected, the Government had elaborated a new 
national programme which was based on an up-to-date assessment of the different 
Chernobyl problems and which stressed the need to rehabilitate the affected areas. 
Clearly, that was a long-term task which could not be concluded successfully without 
clearly-defined scientific guidelines or without the assistance of the scientific 
community. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 46 

144. He drew the attention of the participants at the General Conference to two 
important ideas which had been put forward by the President of Belarus at the 
international conference in April in Vienna on the tenth anniversary of the Chernobyl 
accident. The first was to set up a joint international centre to study the problems of 
Chernobyl which would enable scientists from various countries working in that field 
to combine their efforts. The second was to create a planet protection fund which 
would be funded from part of the considerable profit generated by the nuclear sector 
and would be used to mitigate the consequences of nuclear accidents and implement 
major ecological programmes. He hoped that those ideas would be studied carefully 
by the Agency and other organizations of the United Nations system. 
145. Turning to another subject which was painful for Belarus, namely its 
contributions to the Agency's Regular Budget, he admitted regretfully that it would be 
extremely difficult for his country to resolve that problem in the near future. Belarus' 
difficult economic situation was aggravated by the fact that it currently had to devote 
around 25% of its national budget to measures to remedy the consequences of the 
Chernobyl accident, and its financial difficulties had been further increased by the 
adoption at the forty-seventh session of the General Assembly of the United Nations 
of an unjust and legally unfounded decision to increase by a factor of more than one 
and a half the base rate for Belarus' contributions to the regular budget of the United 
Nations for 1993-1994. That had resulted in an automatic increase in Belarus' 
contributions to the regular budgets of United Nations specialized agencies, including 
the IAEA. 
146. In 1994, in view of the very difficult situation of Belarus, the United Nations had 
reduced its base rate from 0.48% to 0.28% for the period 1995-1997. Nevertheless, 
the arrears which had accumulated over the period 1993-1995 both in the Agency 
and other international organizations were too high for Belarus to pay in time and in 
full. However, despite its economic problems, Belarus was searching for ways to pay 
its arrears in contributions to the Agency as swiftly as possible. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 47 

147. In conclusion, he joined other delegations in approving the Annual Report for 
1995. He also lent his support to the Agency's programme and budget for 1997 as a 
whole and reiterated his country's support for the policy of zero real growth. 
148. Ms. AGGREY-ORLEANS (Ghana), having extended a warm welcome to the 
Republic of Moldova, said that on the threshold of the twenty-first century the quest 
for international peace and security and a better quality of life was becoming ever 
more urgent. Although the world had become relatively more secure, the task of 
controlling conflicts to prevent them escalating into even more dangerous 
confrontations seemed unending. The desire of the world community for peace and 
security put it under an obligation to support the Agency, whose purpose was "to seek 
to accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and 
prosperity throughout the world". For that reason Ghana advocated general and 
complete disarmament, and in particular the elimination of all weapons of mass 
destruction. That accorded with Article VI of the NPT which aimed at the early and 
complete elimination of nuclear weapons. 
149. In that regard, Ghana welcomed the conclusion of the Comprehensive NuclearTest-
Ban Treaty and its approval by the General Assembly. Irrespective of any 
differences that might exist or reservations which Member States might have, the 
Treaty would serve the best interests of the international community and would shield 
it from the danger which the absence of a morally and legally binding instrument 
would continue to pose. Her delegation therefore urged all Member States, especially 
those whose ratification was crucial for the entry into force of the Treaty, to act in the 
interest of humanity. 
150. In April 1996, African leaders had signed in Cairo the Pelindaba Treaty 
establishing an African nuclear-weapon-free zone, thereby affirming their desire for 
the continent to be free of a potentially terrible and destructive force. Ghana was 
confident that that instrument would help to promote nuclear non-proliferation and 
therefore appealed to the nuclear-weapon States, to whom ProtocolIIIofthe Pelindaba 
Treaty was applicable, to sign and ratify the relevant parts of the Treaty. Her 
delegation wished to thank the Agency for the assistance accorded to Africa in the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 48 

preparation of the Treaty and felt sure that such co-operation would be maintained 
throughout the implementation of the Treaty. 

151. The Ghanaian delegation also welcomed the establishment of nuclear-weaponfree 
zones in Latin America and the Caribbean, the South Pacific and South East Asia 
and hoped that other regions would consider following suit. 
152. The coming into force in October of the Convention on Nuclear Safety was 
another encouraging event which would contribute appreciably to sustainable 
development. Global interdependence meant that all countries were under an 
obligation to seek the highest standards of safety. Her delegation had also taken note 
of the close co-operation characterizing the preparation of another important 
instrument, the convention on the safety of radioactive waste management. 
153. Ghana reaffirmed its support for the Agency's safeguards activities. It took note 
of the efforts to streamline and strengthen the Agency's capacity in that regard. The 
ongoing deliberations were a necessary step towards ensuring the observance of nonproliferation 
commitments, but due consideration should also be given to the legitimate 
interests of Member States. 
154. Turning to technical co-operation, she noted that progress had been made with 
technology transfer in the areas of isotope hydrology and seawater desalination and 
that assistance had continued to be provided in the areas of agriculture, nutrition, 
health and industry. Those technical co-operation programmes were valuable for they 
not only contributed to economic growth but also improved the quality of life of the 
people. 
155. She expressed appreciation for the fruitful co-operation between her country 
and the Agency. Over the years the Agency had provided Ghana with technical 
assistance in vital sectors of the economy. It had contributed to research into diseases 
affecting Ghana's major cash crop, cocoa. It had also co-operated with Ghana in the 
implementation of projects on mutation breeding and tissue culture of some local 
staples such as cassava and yam. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 49 

156. After several years of intensive research, Ghana had now acquired expertise in 
radiation disinfestation of foodstuffs and, with the Agency's assistance, was now 
exploring the possibility of semi-industrial irradiation of food crops to further reduce 
post-harvest losses. The gamma irradiation facility, inaugurated in March 1995 by the 
Director General, would have a significant impact on the food and agricultural sector. 
157. Use of the sterile insect technique to eradicate insects threatening agricultural 
production in different parts of the world was a practical and beneficial application of 
nuclear technology. With the requisite support, that technology had the potential not 
only to increase agricultural production but also to solve some related health problems. 
158. In the past year remarkable efforts had been made to promote the peaceful 
applications of nuclear science and technology in the health sector in Ghana. The 
Ministry of Health and the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission, in an effort to improve 
the national health system, had embarked on a programme to commercialize medical 
and pharmaceutical products sterilized by gamma irradiation. 
159. The Agency's Model Project to establish a national brachytherapy, teletherapy 
and nuclear medicine network by creating hospital centres in Accra, Kumasi and 
Tamale was well under way. The Accra centre had been completed and should 
commence operations early in 1997. Construction of the second centre at Kumasi had 
commenced. Ghana sincerely thanked the Agency, the People's Republic of China and 
the United States of America for the substantial assistance granted with that Model 
Project. 
160. The country's first research reactor, GHARR-I had been in full operation since 
its installation and commissioning in March 1995 and was already making an impact 
especially in the mining industry which made use of its neutron activation analysis 
services. Two thousand samples of various origin could be analysed each year. The 
research reactor was also used extensively in the AFRA programme for training in 
reactor core calculations. A start would also be made shortly on producing 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 50 

radioisotopes for domestic use in industry, medicine and agriculture as well as for 
export to other countries in West Africa. 

161. Nuclear non-destructive testing techniques were also being used to provide a 
wide range of services to industries in Ghana and were expected to capture around 
70% of the market by 1997, once the necessary infrastructure was in place. 
162. The Ghanaian delegation was deeply conscious of the fact that the Agency's 
technical assistance had a price. It therefore appealed to Member States to see that 
the Agency had the resources necessary to meet its obligations in that field. 
163. In conclusion, she said that Ghana would continue to support the Agency in 
fulfilling all its various responsibilities. 
´

164. Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland), afterwelcomingtheRepublicofMoldova 
and endorsing the statement made by the delegate of Ireland on behalf of the 
European Union, said that a number of events confirmed man's determination to create 
a world free of nuclear weapons. They were the NPT Review and Extension 
Conference in 1995, followed by the conclusion of the CTBT in 1996; the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones; the continuing negotiations on a treaty 
to end the production of weapons-grade nuclear material; the Moscow Nuclear Safety 
and Security Summit; and the forthcoming conference on the management of nuclear 
materials derived from dismantled weapons. However, further assurances were still 
required to confirm that positive trend, not only as regards non-proliferation and 
disarmament, but also as regards the safety of the peaceful uses of atomic energy. For 
40 years, the public had been raising questions about global nuclear security to which 
the Agency, either directly or indirectly, had been seeking the answers, but much 
remained to be done. 
165. His delegation reaffirmed its support for the Agency's activities and new 
initiatives aimed at strengthening safeguards. The increased use, especially for the 
effective implementation of Programme 93+2, of the best specialists and of national 
laboratories possessing the necessary analytical techniques, was justified. In that 
regard, Poland was willing to offer the services of its nuclear institutes. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 51 

166. Aware that it was important for the effective implementation of the Agency's 
technical assistance programme that Member States honoured their pledges to the TCF, 
Poland wished to announce that, as every year, it would pay its full share of the target. 
167. PolandwelcomedtheSecretariat'sactivitiestostrengthentechnicalco-operation 
between the Agency and its Member States. It was particularly grateful to the Agency 
for the assistance it had provided under the Model Project entitled "Industrial-scale 
Demo Plant for Electron Beam Purification of Flue Gas". Once successfully completed, 
that project, apart from its unique demonstration potential, would not only have a 
beneficial effect on the environment of the region concerned and the neighbouring 
countries but would also offer the possibility, through Agency training programmes, of 
strengthening regional and international co-operation with other Member States 
experiencing similar environmental problems. In view of the scale of the project, 
Poland would welcome assistance from new donors, and invited all Member States 
with an interest in training specialists to co-operate on the project. 
168. The initiative launched the previous year by the Department of Technical 
Co-operation to strengthen regional co-operation among European countries had 
proved fruitful. The holding of regular meetings for the purpose of exchanging 
experience and identifying new areas of common interest should enable those 
countries to agree on a list of regional projects to be implemented in the next biennial 
cycle. 
169. In order to demonstrate its support for that type of co-operation and the 
importance it attributed to international co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and 
radiation protection, Poland had organized a meeting dedicated to such matters in 
Warsaw in June which was attended by representatives of 15 countries of the region. 
The meeting, co-sponsored by the Agency, had also discussed the question of illicit 
trafficking in nuclear materials and radioactive sources. 
170. Poland took a keen interest in all activities aimed at tackling more effectively 
illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and radioactive sources. It welcomed the 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 52 

establishment of the Agency's database of recorded incidents, and confirmed its 
willingness to participate in that initiative. It had made the necessary arrangements 
and would shortly provide the Agency with the details of its contact point for 
exchanges of information on illicit trafficking. 

171. The main task of the Standing Committee on Liability for Nuclear Damage was 
to revise the Vienna Convention. It might be assumed that the task had already been 
accomplished, since the draft protocol to amend the Vienna Convention was complete. 
Yet, as far as the draft supplementary funding convention was concerned, certain 
issues had not been settled, such as the structure of supplementary funding, the 
relationship between the proposed convention and regional agreements on the same 
subject (such as the Brussels Supplementary Convention), and contributions to the 
supplementary fund. Contrary to expectations, those matters had not been resolved 
during the Standing Committee's fifteenth session, and unfortunately they were 
unlikely to be resolved at the next session in October. As Poland was surrounded by 
countries operating nuclear facilities, it attached particular importance to amendment 
of the Vienna Convention, and urged countries which had not already done so to 
accede to it. 
172. Poland did not see any need to link the revision of the Vienna Convention to 
the supplementary funding convention, since they were autonomous instruments. The 
draft protocol to amend the Vienna Convention prepared by the Standing Committee 
could be considered a substantial improvement on international law concerning civil 
liability for nuclear damage, and the revised Vienna Convention should become the 
main international instrument in that field. Recalling that the revised Vienna 
Convention, which limited the liability of the nuclear operator, did not resolve the 
problem of adequate compensation for nuclear damage, Poland urged the Secretariat 
and the States parties to the Convention to convene a diplomatic conference as soon 
as possible for the purpose of adopting the revised text, and to continue work in the 
Standing Committee with a view to reaching consensus on a draft supplementary 
funding convention. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 53 

173. Poland, which had no nuclear power plants but was surrounded by countries 
which operated them, considered it essential to conclude a full set of bilateral 
agreements on early notification of a nuclear accident and on co-operation in the field 
of nuclear safety and radiation protection. He was thus pleased to report that Poland 
had already concluded eight such agreements with its neighbours. 
174. In conclusion, he expressed his country's appreciation to the Director General 
and the Secretariat for the effective way they were handling the Agency's difficult task 
of promoting the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and strengthening the nonproliferation 
regime. 
175. Ms. ALEMAYEHU (Ethiopia)saidthattheGeneralConferenceprovidedan 
excellent opportunity for evaluating the Agency's work and for Member States to 
reaffirm their commitment to the objectives of the Agency and the principles enshrined 
in its Statute. Nuclear technology had developed at an unprecedented rate over the 
past 20 to 30 years, and even more spectacular progress was anticipated at the 
beginning of the twenty-first century. The Agency thus had an even more important 
role to play in the new world order, especially in harnessing nuclear energy for the 
benefit of mankind. Beyond the year 2000, its contribution to peace and sustainable 
development worldwide would indeed be vital. 
176. Ethiopia commended the Agency and the Director General for the excellent 
quality of the Annual Report for 1995, which was clear, informative and 
comprehensive. The Agency had successfully discharged its functions and accorded 
due emphasis to measures promoting sustainable development. 
177. In its programme and budget for 1997 and 1998, the Agency had sought on the 
whole to follow up the resolutions and decisions of the General Conference and the 
Board of Governors. Her delegation supported all the Agency's programmes, including 
the strengthening of the safeguards system, but still believed that there should be a 
balance between safeguards and regulatory activities on the one hand, and those 
aimed at promoting the transfer and dissemination of nuclear science and technology 
on the other. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 54 

178. It was encouraging to note that food and agriculture were to be given high 
priority for the coming two years. Past experience had shown that the famine and 
drought which were rife in Africa could only be tackled by making agriculture the main 
development objective. Consequently, projects focusing on irrigation, genetic 
improvement of food products, soil fertility, control of animal diseases and water 
resources management would all help to resolve the crucial food security problem in 
Africa. Projects relating to human health -another important area covered by the 
programme -also gave African countries the chance to use nuclear medicine to tackle 
certain diseases such as cancer and communicable and hereditary diseases, which 
could otherwise not be treated. 
179. The Technical Co-operation Report for 1995 showed highly encouraging results. 
Thus, the implementation rate had reached 75.7% for the overall programme, which 
was a record, and 85.5% for the Model Projects. The Agency had endeavoured to 
provide technical assistance to the developing countries that fitted in with the 
objectives of sustainable development. Moreover, it had strengthened the capacity of 
developing countries to use atomic energy for peaceful purposes. However, successful 
implementation of Model Projects would require further strengthening of the technical 
co-operation programme, with care being taken to ensure increased assistance for the 
least developed countries. 
180. Her country was one of the beneficiaries of the technical co-operation 
programme. In 1991, at Ethiopia's request, the Agency had undertaken the first 
country programme review, which had helped Ethiopia identify areas for technical cooperation 
and assign them priorities in line with its national development plans and 
which, in particular, had inspired it to look for opportunities to use nuclear science and 
technology in the service of development. A Model Project on the use of the sterile 
insect technique to eradicate the tsetse fly in Ethiopia was being set up. As Ethiopia 
had the largest livestock population in Africa, the presence of the tsetse fly and the 
disease it transmitted to livestock affected some five million people. That Model Project 
was thus vital for Ethiopia, which was grateful to the Agency for having proposed it 
as a major priority for the United Nations System-wide Special Initiative on Africa. It 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 55 

was especially grateful to the Department of Technical Co-operation and its Head, Mr. 
Qian. 

181. Also welcome was the initiative to improve and strengthen the implementation 
of the technical co-operation programme through the Standing Advisory Group for 
Technical Co-operation (SAGTAC). Given the limited resources at the Agency's 
disposal, it was essential to enhance the effectiveness and efficiency of the programme 
in order to meet the development needs of the recipient countries. 
182. HerdelegationnotedwithsatisfactionthatimplementationoftheregionalModel 
Project on water resources in Africa had made great strides, and that the Agency had 
taken steps to strengthen the socio-economic impact of the utilization of isotope 
techniques in water resources exploitation and management in Member States, and to 
enhance their benefits to the end-user. In that regard, she emphasized that the 
availability of clean drinking water was crucial to the developing countries, as it had 
a direct effect on human health, contributed to the optimum utilization of economic 
resources, and helped to promote sustainable development. It followed that the 
Agency should press forward with its activities in that area. 
183. The Ethiopian delegation wished to thank the Agency for the initiative it had 
taken, in response to requests by African States, to establish the African Regional Co-
operative Agreement (AFRA), which had gained in importance since its entry into force 
on 4 April 1990, and whose objectives were to facilitate technical co-operation among 
developing countries, to pool available resources, and to promote communication and 
collaboration between the scientists of the region. However, that type of regional 
arrangement, which fostered the transfer of nuclear technology, required detailed and 
judicious planning that met the needs of all the participating countries, as well as a 
firm commitment on their part. The Agency played a vital supporting role in that 
regard. It should continue to encourage regional initiatives until they were firmly 
established. That was especially important in the case of Africa, where the countries 
of the region, with one or two exceptions, lacked the required scientific and technical 
capacity in the nuclear field. The extension of the agreement for a further five years 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 56 

wasproofofitssuccess. Ethiopia,whichhadbeenapartytoAFRAsince1993, would 
continue to contribute to its activities. 

184. The African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty (the Pelindaba Treaty), signed 
in Cairo on 11 April, was an important landmark in African history. Since its inception, 
the Organization of African Unity had been striving for the denuclearization of the 
African continent which, like other regions without nuclear weapons, had lived in a 
state of uncertainty during the Cold War. A new era of peace and co-operation had 
begun, as indicated by the Declaration adopted by the African States on the occasion 
of the signing of the Pelindaba Treaty, which testified to the importance of regional 
and international co-operation for the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
185. The text of the Treaty centred on two issues -the protection of African States 
against possible nuclear attacks on their territories, and the development and practical 
application of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes in the interest of sustainable social 
and economic progress on the African continent. Particular attention was also paid to 
the mechanism for ensuring the effective application of the Treaty's provisions. The 
establishment of the African Commission on Nuclear Energy was a clear indication of 
the African countries' determination to abide by those provisions. It should not be 
forgotten that the principles laid down in the Treaty were the fruit of long years of 
negotiation. The United Nations had also played a significant role by facilitating 
international co-operation and arranging forums for discussions. The Agency also 
deserved special appreciation for its contribution to the preparation of the Treaty. 
There was no doubt that the Agency would fulfil the verification role that it would be 
required to carry out through its safeguards system. 
186. The report of the Director General on the employment of women in the 
Secretariat, contained in document GC(40)/19, deserved special attention. For over 20 
years the world community, aware that women were not participating on an equal 
footing with men in world affairs, which equally concerned them, had been trying to 
redress the situation. The United Nations had taken significant steps to improve the 
lot of women. The Fourth World Conference on Women, held in Beijing in 1995, had 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 57 

endorsed a Platform for Action which deserved the support of all States. The initiative 
taken by the Agency pursuant to resolution GC(39)/RES/20 to increase the number of 
women staff was very encouraging. Equally commendable was its intention to recruit 
more women from the developing countries. Although the results had not yet matched 
expectations, Ethiopia encouraged the Agency to maintain its efforts. 

187. Ethiopia attached great importance to the work of the Agency and supported 
its objectives in all its areas of activity. Having ratified the NPT as early as 1970 and 
signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency which had entered into force in 
December 1977, Ethiopia was determined to comply fully with the letter and spirit of 
those instruments. 
188. As part of its reconstruction effort, the Ethiopian Government had formulated a 
comprehensive policy of development, peace and democracy which gave a prominent 
place to science and technology and aimed to make scientific activity more productive, 
efficient and development-oriented. It also placed emphasis on R&Dand the utilization 
of energy techniques appropriate to Ethiopia, and encouraged the use of new 
technologies in the fields of agriculture, health and industry. 
189. Aware that no credible nuclear programme could be established in a country 
without safeguards and regulations which covered all aspects of safety thoroughly and 
transparently, Ethiopia had promulgated a law on radiation protection in 1993. That 
was the standpoint from which Ethiopia conducted its relations with the Agency and 
co-ordinated its efforts with those of other developing countries, especially in Africa, 
with a view to promoting the sustainable economic and social development of the 
continent. 
190. The policy of universality adopted by the Agency had enabled all countries developed 
and developing -to participate on an equal basis in implementing its 
programmes and strategies. That was why, even if it was difficult to protect the world 
from nuclear dangers, the task was not an insurmountable one as long as the Agency 
could count on the unfailing support and co-operation of all peace-loving nations. 
Finally, she welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a new Member State of the Agency. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 58 

191. Mr. CÁCERES AGUILERA (Paraguay), having welcomed the Republic of 
Moldova to the Agency, said his country reaffirmed its support for the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy and co-operation for development, emphatically rejected 
the possibility of using nuclear energy for military purposes, and confirmed its legal 
commitments with regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and the 
application of safeguards. 
192. Paraguay's National Atomic Energy Commission was currently involved in 
various technical co -operation projects on nuclear medicine, 
radiopharmacy,stockbreeding, nuclear analytical techniques, waste management and 
radiation protection. Paraguay had submitted for the following biennial programme 
a project on the application of isotope techniques for the study of aquifers and 
contamination of water resources. 
193. In 1996 Paraguay had had the honour of hosting the thirteenth technical coordination 
meeting of ARCAL, which had been attended by representatives from the 
participating countries, the Agency and donor countries. The ARCALprogramme was 
appreciated in Latin America and the Caribbean because it was an excellent example 
of international integration and co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy. For Paraguay, which was currently making efforts to consolidate the South 
American Common Market, it was further proof of the political will to achieve 
development which contributed to the well-being of all the inhabitants of the country 
and the region. Paraguay considered it essential, within the framework of the process 
to strengthen ARCAL, to prepare a regional co-operation plan identifying the areas and 
sectors where Agency co-operation efforts should be concentrated in the coming years. 
194. Paraguay had taken part in the first meeting of presidents of the nuclear bodies 
of the South American Common Market, held in Argentina, during which it had been 
agreed to include nuclear issues in the Common Market's scope of activity and to 
establish a working group on nuclear energy and its applications. Within that group 
a sub-group comprising Argentina, Bolivia and Paraguay had been set up to study the 
technical and economic advantages of using isotope hydrology in the development of 
water resources. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 59 

195. He wished to inform the General Conference that his country would be paying 
its pledged voluntary contribution to the Technical Co-operation Fund for 1997. 
196. On the occasion of the hundredth anniversary of the discovery of radioactivity, 
the Nuclear Documentation Centre at the National Atomic Energy Commission had 
published the first issue of the Atomindex Paraguay as well as the first issue of its 
nuclear bulletin. Furthermore, the Commission was connected via Internet to all the 
countries in the world. 
197. With regard to training, the National Atomic Energy Commission was continuing 
to organize national and international courses on such topics as radiation protection, 
nuclear analytical techniques (theory and practice), nuclear instrumentation, the ELISA 
technique and other analytical techniques, thereby providing training to more than 60 
specialists and students. With a view to advertising the benefits of nuclear energy, it 
was about to organize its third open day on topics related to the peaceful applications 
of nuclear energy. In addition, it was continuing to develop its links with various 
public bodies in order to promote the advantages of nuclear energy. 

GC(40)/OR.6 
page 60 

198. Finally, on behalf of his Government, he thanked the Director General and the 
staff of the Agency for their continuing efforts to meet all the challenges in the nuclear 
field, and called on all Member States to provide the Agency with the support it 
needed to fulfil its statutory objectives. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

7.5 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
January 1997 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 19 September 1996, at 10.20 a.m. 


President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 
Item 


of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

-Request for the restoration of voting rights 1 -2 

7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (resumed) 3 -111 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Cuba 3-10 
Iraq 11 -16 
Kenya 17 -27 
Bolivia 28 -36 
United Arab Emirates 37 -42 
Nicaragua 43 -49 
Namibia 50 -57 
Israel 58 -67 
Peru 68 -76 
Myanmar 77 -82 
Zimbabwe 83 -87 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 88 -94 
Sri Lanka 95 -103 
Kuwait 104 -111 

[*] GC(40)/22. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96-03371 (XXV) 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.7 
page 2 

Abbreviations used in this record 
AFRA African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, 
Development and Training Related to Nuclear Science and 
Technology 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Basic Safety 
Standards International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against 
Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 
CTBT Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty 
G-7 Group of Seven 
ICRP International Commission on Radiological Protection 
MESA Middle East and South Asia 
NDT Non-destructive testing 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Pelindaba Treaty African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 
PTBT Partial Test Ban Treaty (Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in 
the Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water) 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
RIA Radioimmunoassay 
SMPRs Small and medium power reactors 
SPECT Single photon emission computed tomography 
TCF Technical Co-operation Fund 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
UNSCOM United Nations Special Commission for the Elimination of Iraq's 
Weapons of Mass Destruction 


GC(40)/OR.7 
page 3 

REQUEST FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS 

1. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had had before it a 
request from Kenya that the last sentence in Article XIX.A of the Statute be invoked in 
order that it might be permitted to vote during the current session of the General 
Conference. The Committee had recommended that the Conference permit Kenya to 
vote on the understanding that that decision did not constitute a precedent for the 
future. 
2. The Committee's recommendation was accepted. 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (resumed) 

3. Ms. SIMEÓN NEGRÍN (Cuba), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova 
on its becoming a member of the Agency, noted that the current session of the General 
Conference had particular significance, since 1996 marked the centenary of the 
discovery of radioactivity. 
4. Cuba was making tremendous efforts to overcome a complex economic situation, 
the main cause of which was the unjust and brutal economic, commercial and financial 
embargo which had been imposed for over 30 years by the most powerful nation in 
the world. That embargo had been condemned on various occasions by the United 
Nations General Assembly. Through the Helms-Burton Law, an attempt was now being 
made to force the international community to join that embargo. That Law, which had 
been criticized throughout the world, related mainly to international trade and 
displayed a marked lack of respect for other countries. It specifically opposed the 
completion of the Juraguá nuclear power plant and viewed as an act of aggression the 
operation of any nuclear facility on Cuban territory. It thus attempted to deprive Cuba 
of the social and economic benefits which the peaceful uses of nuclear energy could 
bring. It was not her intention to distract the General Conference from the important 
problems of a global nature which it had before it, but she had brought up the issue 
because the behaviour of the country concerned was totally unacceptable and contrary 
to the Agency's noble aims. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 4 

5. Despite the severe economic difficulties that it was facing, Cuba had, by virtue 
of the will of its people and through the promotion of scientific and technical training, 
not only been able to maintain social progress in such areas as health, science, and 
education, but had also been able to confront its problems and initiate an economic 
recovery, which had led to an increase in gross domestic product of 2.5% in 1995 and 
9.6% in the first half of 1996. There had also been a recovery and realignment of 
Cuba's nuclear programme which was, more than ever, one of the country's main 
priorities. The Isotope Centre had been completed, put into operation and had already 
supplied over 17 types of radioisotope and labelled compounds. The Centre for 
Radiation Protection and Hygiene had also become fully operational. Sixteen research 
projects on the development of nuclear techniques had been included in seven 
national programmes related to health, food production and other areas of vital 
importance to the country. Special emphasis had been given to the programme on 
radiation protection and nuclear safety and, despite the restrictions which were being 
imposed, Cuba was continuing to work on the resumption of the construction of the 
Juraguá nuclear power plant. In all those efforts, the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities in Cuba were of vital importance since they were closely linked to national 
programmes. Cuba had made and would continue to make every possible effort to 
make optimum use of that co-operation. 
6. Cuba supported, and would continue to contribute as far as it was able to, the 
measures to strengthen international co-operation in the area of nuclear safety, 
radiation protection and radioactive waste management. Particularly in the field of 
radiation protection, the support which Cuba was giving to other Member States was 
increasing, especially in its own region. 
7. Turning to the strengthening of the Agency's technical co-operation activities, 
she said that it was essential to make every effort to ensure that those activities were 
implemented with the greatest possible efficiency and that they achieved the greatest 
possible impact. Calling on all States to pay their share of the target for voluntary 
contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund, she noted that, despite its economic 
difficulties, Cuba had met its obligations in that regard. Cuba would also continue to 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 5 

contribute to the ARCAL programme, which had proved to be a good mechanism for 
channelling co-operation at regional level. 

8. Thestrengtheningoftheefficiencyandeffectivenessofsafeguardswasanother 
important area. The aim should be to achieve the total prohibition of nuclear weapons, 
while ensuring that there was no discrimination in the application of the measures and 
that there was no violation of national sovereignty. It was also important to maintain 
a suitable balance between promotional and safeguards activities. 
9. Cuba had continued to support the efforts of the international community to 
eradicate the threat of nuclear weapons. Following the signing of the Tlatelolco Treaty 
by the Cuban Government and the acceptance of the amendments thereto, Cuba was 
undertaking the steps required to ratify the Treaty. In order to be meaningful, the 
long-term aim of non-proliferation should be the total elimination of nuclear weapons. 
Cuba had therefore followed with interest the efforts of the international community 
to agree on a comprehensive nuclear test ban treaty. However, the agreement that 
had been reached was very fragile, since it did not include a commitment on the part 
of the nuclear-weapon States to eliminate their arsenals. 
10. In conclusion, she urged all States to strive to utilize progress in the nuclear area 
to meet the challenges of the next millennium and not for the purposes of destruction. 
11. Mr. GHAFOUR (Iraq)pointedoutthatsince3September1996hiscountry 
had been subjected to renewed military aggression from the United States of America, 
which claimed that it was implementing Security Council resolution 688(1991), 
although that resolution neither called for, nor authorized, the use of force. The 
President of the United States had also decided to suspend implementation of Security 
Council resolution 986(1995) and the "oil-for-food" agreement between Iraq and the 
United Nations. Furthermore, creation of the so-called "safe haven" had resulted in 
part of Iraq becoming a field for combat, destruction, vandalism and looting, open to 
the forces of other countries to enter at will, thereby violating Iraq's integrity and 
sovereignty. Thousands of innocent people in that part of Iraq had become victims of 
such atrocities since the end of 1991 while that superpower had taken no action. On 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 6 

the other hand, when the majority of the Kurdish people had asked for the help of the 
central Government of Iraq in dealing with a foreign intervention, Iraq had been turned 
into a venue for United States presidential election celebrations, with cruise missiles 
instead of fireworks. 

12. The favourite hobby of United States leaders and high-ranking military officials 
seemed to be bombardment to the point of complete annihilation of a country or the 
total elimination of a people. It had started with the genocide of the original 
inhabitants of America and had been followed later by the atomic bombing of 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. At a press conference during the 1991 war with Iraq, 
General Schwarzkopf, Commander of Operation Desert Storm, had said that the air 
strikes on Iraq did not inflict damage on innocent civilians because the Iraqi people 
were not innocent since most of them had welcomed the so-called "invasion" of 
Kuwait and supported Saddam Hussein. General Schwarzkopf had added that the 
expression "innocent civilians" needed to be redefined. On 16 September 1990, The 
Washington Post had published a statement by General Dugan, Chief of Staff of the 
United States Air Force, indicating that the list of targets in Iraq should be expanded 
to ensure a more devastating impact on the population and Government. The United 
States had dropped 120 000 tonnes of explosives on Iraq, exceeding several times the 
destructive power of the two atomic bombs on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, and the United 
States policy of military aggression, starvation and sanctions had led to the deaths of 
over three-quarters of a million children from 1990 to 1996. Security Council 
resolutions 687 and 688 were being interpreted politically rather than legally in order 
to prolong the sanctions imposed on the people of Iraq, thereby starving its people and 
destroying its national and social fibre. 
13. Iraq had repeatedly expressed the hope that the Agency, as a specialized 
professional organization, would exercise its mandate under section C of Security 
Council resolution 687 and not bow to political influence. The Agency had known for 
a long time that Iraq had no nuclear capabilities, as had been confirmed by Agency 
officials several times since 1992, and most recently in paragraph 27 of the Director 
General's report on the implementation of United Nations Security Council resolutions 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 7 

relating to Iraq contained in document GC(40)/13. That was the essence of 
paragraph 12 of section C of Security Council resolution 687. 

14. Asreportedinparagraph 13ofdocumentGC(40)/13, theAgencyhadconducted 
preliminary activities for ongoing monitoring and verification, including 600 -mostly 
unannounced -inspections. No indication of any prohibited equipment, materials or 
activities had been detected. The essence of paragraph 13 of Security Council 
resolution 687 had therefore been fulfilled. 
15. In addition to the more than one million pages of information already provided 
on its nuclear programme, on 1 March 1996 Iraq had completed a document 
containing more than a thousand pages constituting the full, final and complete 
declaration of its nuclear programme. After discussion with Agency inspectors 
concerning the necessary additions, deletions, and modifications, the final document 
had been submitted on 7 September 1996. Iraqi technical staff had made enormous 
efforts to trace destroyed equipment, document it and present it in a way that 
facilitated the taking of inventories and verification by the inspection team. Iraq had 
implemented its part of the relevant Security Council resolutions and it was now the 
Agency's turn to meet its obligation by closing the file on Iraq and informing the 
Security Council that it should put paragraph 22 of its resolution 687 into effect. 
Regrettably, that had not yet been done. Disinformation campaigns aimed at 
engendering mistrust and suspicion were being continued by those interested in 
perpetuating the sanctions imposed on Iraq. In 1995, for example, false documents 
had been circulated on an alleged secret nuclear activity in Iraq. Co-operation 
between his country and the Agency had, as stated in document GOV/INF/770/Add.1, 
helped to reveal that those documents were not authentic. 
16. The Agency, which had a responsibility towards the people of Iraq, should not 
be a party to, or facilitate intentionally or unintentionally, the starvation and mass 
elimination of the Iraqi people, which had in the past made such a valuable 
contribution to world civilization. Prior to the imposition of the sanctions, Iraq had 
imported most of its food, medicine and other vital supplies and it had subsequently 
made enormous efforts to provide its people with some of those basic needs in order 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 8 

to avoid a terrible human catastrophe costing millions of lives. In conclusion, he urged 
that the sanctions on Iraq be lifted to enable its people to resume its active 
contribution to world civilization. 

17. Ms. TOLLE (Kenya), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a new 
member of the Agency, said that the adoption of the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban 
Treaty in New York represented a major step forward in the field of nuclear 
disarmament and she looked forward to the first preparatory Committee meeting for 
the next NPT Review Conference. 
18. The signing of the Pelindaba Treaty in April 1996 would strengthen further the 
non-proliferation regime and it illustrated the importance attached by African States 
to the NPT. Such regional agreements on the peaceful uses of nuclear technology were 
a useful means of reducing tension, encouraging sustainable socio-economic 
development and promoting confidence and regional security. It was essential to 
support such regional efforts to curb nuclear proliferation and Kenya was encouraged 
by the Agency's work in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, the 
strengthening of safeguards and the enhancement of nuclear safety. 
19. An adequate and reliable source of energy was essential for sustainable 
economic development. Currently many countries, particularly the developing and 
least developed countries were overly dependent on hydroelectric power and fossil 
fuels; other sustainable energy sources, including nuclear energy, needed to be 
explored. The Agency therefore had an important role to play in the development of 
nuclear research reactors for developing and least developed countries. 
20. Her Government welcomed the implementation of the Part 1 measures of 
Programme 93+2. The draft protocol under discussion, as contained in document 
GOV/2863, was a good working basis for further negotiation with a view to developing 
a balanced legal instrument of a universal and non-discriminatory nature to provide 
better assurance of the non-diversion of nuclear material. 
21. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, her delegation was 
in favour of enlarging the Board to achieve a more equitable representation and to 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 9 

reflect the prevailing global realities. In the past, Africa, in particular, had been 
marginalized as far as representation on the Board was concerned. 

22. Turning to technical co-operation, she said that Kenya was grateful for the 
assistance it had received in the form of projects, training, the supply of equipment, 
expert missions and funding. Assistance had been provided in the areas of agricultural 
production, health care, radiation safety and radioactive waste management. 
Furthermore, Kenya's Institute of Nuclear Science had been upgraded with Agency 
support and was currently providing training and expert services in the application of 
nuclear analytical techniques and instrumentation for East Africa. Agency assistance 
had also enabled Kenya to improve its application of NDT techniques and its use of 
isotope methods to solve various water resources problems. 
23. Kenya had made good progress in ensuring that the Agency's technical cooperation 
activities were in line with national goals and priorities. The Agency's multidisciplinary 
expert mission to Kenya in April 1996 had identified the fields of health, 
water, agriculture and food as areas in which nuclear techniques could play a 
significant role and in which technical co-operation activities should be concentrated. 
Her country had high hopes of the Country Programme Framework, and hoped to 
exploit the relevant nuclear technology to meet the challenges of sustained national 
socio-economic development. She was confident that the Agency would provide 
assistance for the development of institutional capacity as well as a nuclear science 
and technology strategy. 
24. As to regional co-operation, AFRA had played a vital role in strengthening the 
concept of regional co-operation and self-reliance. Kenya fully supported the activities 
undertaken within the framework of AFRA and urged the Agency to take action to 
ensure the sustainability of the benefits derived from AFRA projects. 
25. While Kenya recognized the importance of the timely payment of contributions, 
it also noted that unpredictable difficulties caused by prolonged droughts, conflicts and 
other factors continued to affect the economic performance of some countries. Kenya 
was no exception in that respect, but she was pleased to report that her country's 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 10 

economy was already showing positive signs and her Government had taken the 
necessary steps to address the issue of its financial obligations to the Agency. 

26. Having commended the Agency's efforts to increase the number of Professional 
staff members from developing countries in the Secretariat, she expressed her 
delegation's appreciation ofthe increase in the numberofwomen in Professionalposts. 
However, the representation of women was still low and she urged the Agency to step 
up its efforts to increase the representation of women in Professional positions, paying 
particular consideration to women from developing countries. 
27. Finally, she noted with satisfaction that the next meeting of the open-ended 
group of legal and technical experts that was preparing the convention on the safety 
of radioactive waste management was to be held in South Africa and she urged the 
Agency to increase the number of such high-level international meetings taking place 
on the African continent. 
28. Mr. MEYER MEDINA (Bolivia) said his delegation was pleased with 
progress made towards strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency 
of the safeguards system in order to detect any diversion of nuclear materials. His 
Government strongly supported efforts to implement Part 1 of Programme 93+2 and 
believed that negotiations regarding Part 2 should be continued with the same 
determination. A concerted effort would help attain the objectives of improving the 
system's efficiency and of protecting world peace and security. 
29. In February 1995, Bolivia -convinced that the safeguards system should apply 
to all countries, whether they possessed nuclear facilities and material or not -had 
ratified the safeguards agreement resulting from its signing of the NPT and the 
Tlatelolco Treaty. Bolivia was a peace-loving country traditionally committed to nonproliferation 
and complete nuclear disarmament. It had therefore supported the recent 
approval by the General Assembly of the CTBT. His country was opposed not only to 
nuclear tests, but also to arms production. 
30. Bolivia looked forward to a further increase in the technical co-operation 
provided by the Agency pursuant to Article IV(2) of the NPT, which stated that Parties 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 11 

should"facilitate ...thefullestpossibleexchangeofequipment, materialsandscientific 
and technological information for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy". Although 
countries receiving technical assistance from the Agency were becoming aware of the 
peaceful applications and uses of nuclear energy, further efforts should be made in 
order to bring maximum benefit to all sectors of society. Some countries still viewed 
nuclear technologies with scepticism and knew little of the valuable contribution they 
could make to sustainable and balanced development. His Government was 
determined to contribute to the dissemination of information on the benefits of nuclear 
technology and planned to hold -in co-operation with the Agency -a seminar in 
1997 on nuclear energy policies and uses with the active participation of the media, 
politicians and scientists. 

31. Technical co-operation between developing countries was successfully being 
promoted, as demonstrated by the recent donation to Bolivia from the Argentine 
National Atomic Energy Commission of two cobalt therapy units for the radiotherapy 
services of hospitals in La Paz and Sucre. Bolivia was very grateful to Argentina for 
that valuable donation. As for the ARCALprogramme, like other regional programmes, 
it had proved to be an effective way of obtaining technical assistance. His Government 
fully supported that programme and reaffirmed its conviction that ARCAL members 
should give it a high priority. 
32. Bolivia was receiving considerable support from the Agency in various fields, 
particularly human and animal health, agriculture, radiation protection and the control 
of ionizing radiation. It had established a suitable infrastructure and had acquired the 
capability of carrying out itself substantial parts of the nuclear projects which were 
being implemented. A high-level Agency mission had visited Bolivia in April 1996 to 
evaluate not only the co-operation programme in progress, but also to establish a new 
programming focus for the coming years. He was grateful for that mission and felt sure 
that the structural changes in Bolivia and the efforts being made had not gone 
unnoticed. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 12 

33. He was pleased to see that Agency resources to support the transfer of 
technology had increased considerably as a result of voluntary contributions from 
Member States to the TCF and he thanked countries which had contributed. 
34. Bolivia reaffirmed its support for the new approaches in the technical cooperation 
programme to reflect national priorities in scientific, technological, economic 
and social development. It also welcomed the "partner in development" concept, 
which would give a more strategic orientation to technical co-operation with 
developing Member States and improve the capability in national institutions for 
defining and developing the application of nuclear technology for sustainable human 
development and promoting horizontal co-operation. 
35. His Government had been making great efforts in recent years to transform 
Bolivia into a modern State. There had unfortunately been a delay in ratification of the 
Conventions on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material, Early Notification of a 
Nuclear Accident and Assistance in the Case of Nuclear Accident or Radiological 
Emergency. However, he hoped that that process would be completed in the shortest 
possible time. His country was aware of the need to attain a suitable level of 
protection of the population against the harmful effects of ionizing radiation and 
approval of a law on radiological protection and safety was expected shortly. 
36. Finally, he noted that the Bolivian Government had approved payment of its 
arrears to the Agency's Regular Budget, thereby demonstrating its willingness to meet 
its financial obligations. 
37. Mr. ALSHAMSI (UnitedArabEmirates), havingwelcomedtheapprovalof 
the Republic of Moldova for membership of the Agency, noted that the Agency had 
been playing an increasingly important role in world affairs in recent years, 
channelling nuclear expertise into areas that served the interests of mankind and 
opposing the use of nuclear energy for military purposes. The United Arab Emirates 
had consistently discharged its obligations to the Agency as a firm believer in its 
humanitarian aims and hoped to continue and increase its collaboration through 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 13 

technical co-operation programmes for the peaceful use of nuclear technology in such 
areas as medicine and agriculture. 

38. Like many other countries, the United Arab Emirates had a problem of water 
scarcity and depended on the desalination of sea water for its water supply. It had 
therefore been following with enthusiasm the Agency's endeavours to obtain fresh 
water economically through the use of nuclear technology and encouraged it to persist 
with its action in that crucial area. 
39. The international community had recently taken a welcome step forward in the 
area of the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons and although that step fell short of 
global aspirations for the elimination of such weapons, it was certainly a promising 
development, especially when viewed alongside the creation of the African NuclearWeapon-
Free Zone and the adoption by the United Nations General Assembly of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. 
40. On the other hand, the situation in the Middle East still posed a threat to world 
peace. The spirit of détente in international relations was still absent from Israel's 
political thinking. It refused to accede to the NPT and to place its nuclear facilities 
under Agency safeguards. Its arsenal of nuclear weapons posed a permanent threat 
to its neighbours. Furthermore, there had been reports of nuclear accidents at the 
Dimona reactor related to the storage and disposal of nuclear wastes; the existence of 
such a reactor in an earthquake-prone area represented a threat not only to human 
life, but also to the environment and groundwater sources in the region. 
41. The international community should live up to its responsibilities and take 
determined action to eliminate nuclear weapons and all weapons of mass destruction 
from the Middle East. The Agency's safeguards system should be applied to nuclear 
facilities in all States, including Israel, so that the Middle East could become a nuclearweapon-
free zone. 
42. Finally, with respect to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he said that 
it was high time to expand the Board of Governors in order to reflect major political 
developments and the spread of nuclear technology. As to discussions on the 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 14 

composition of regional groups, his country believed that the issue of the Board's 
expansion should first be settled, particularly since deferral of membership of a group 
did not impede the provision of technical assistance by the Agency. Moreover, factors 
other than geographical location should be taken into account in the formation of 
groups and the decision to admit or reject a member should be left to the regional 
groups themselves. 

43. Mr. ARGÜELLO HURTADO (Nicaragua), after congratulating Moldova on 
becoming a new member of the Agency and welcoming the safeguards agreement 
signed between Chile and the Agency, thanked the Director General for his continuous 
efforts to maintain the provision of technical assistance to developing countries and his 
determined pursuit of the Agency's safeguards objectives. 
44. On his visit to Nicaragua earlier in the year, the Director General himself had 
witnessed the beneficial effects of the peaceful application of nuclear techniques on 
the daily lives of the poorest sectors of the country's population. His Government was 
grateful to all the countries which had made such assistance possible, especially the 
major donors. Nicaragua, which had a good record of paying its contributions, believed 
that the Agency's technical assistance should be provided on as universal a basis as 
possible, regardless of political considerations and factors such as a country's 
contributions to the Agency's Regular Budget and that the poorest countries should be 
given the greatest assistance. His country was in favour of Model Projects, which 
offered a means of helping broad sectors of populations, and also supported the ARCAL 
programme and the greater emphasis being placed on regional co-operation 
programmes by the Agency. 
45. Although there were no safeguards in Central America, his delegation had 
followed the discussions of Programme 93+2 with great interest, and strongly 
supported the work of the Committee on Strengthening the Effectiveness and 
Improving the Efficiency of the Safeguards System established by the Board in June. 
A new safeguards system was vitally important, but he trusted that the cost of 
implementing the Part 2 measures of Programme 93+2 would not be detrimental to 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 15 

the resources available for technical co-operation and that a balance would be 
maintained in the overall distribution of resources. 

46. Turning to personnel matters, he commended the efforts that had been made 
to recruit more women, despite the fact that the increase during the past year had not 
been spectacular owing to the difficulties of finding Professional women with suitable 
qualifications for the Agency. 
47. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he said that any 
reform must take into account the strong desire of many countries which had recently 
made rapid progress in the application of nuclear technology to have a permanent seat 
on the Board, and also the wish of some regions to increase the number of their 
members, while not allowing any loss of other Member States' representativity. It was 
important to maintain the balance inherent in the existing Article VI by ensuring that 
a significant number of elected seats were open to less developed countries. Above 
all, the work should be carried out on the basis of a consensus among Member States. 
48. His Government welcomed the forthcoming entry into force of the Convention 
on Nuclear Safety, and supported the Secretariat's efforts to ensure that a number of 
conventions and agreements in the nuclear field were ratified by the greatest possible 
number of countries and brought into force with the minimum of delay. 
49. Finally, he wished to acknowledge publicly the work of the Agency's staff, 
particularly in the field of technical co-operation. It was their dedication and loyalty 
which had earned the Agency the distinguished position it now occupied within the 
United Nations family. 
50. Ms. SCHIMMING-CHASE (Namibia), having welcomed Moldova as a new 
member of the Agency, commended the Agency on its achievements in the areas of 
radiation protection, nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and on the 
technical assistance provided to various Member States. 
51. Namibia was greatly encouraged by the signing of the Pelindaba Treaty to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, and by the adoption of the 
Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty by the United Nations General Assembly. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 16 

52. Namibia's main development objectives were to foster economic growth, to 
reduce poverty and inequality, to increase income-earning opportunities, to develop 
human resources, education and vocational training and agriculture, to achieve selfsufficiency 
in food production and to provide primary health care services to all. 
Ionizing radiation and radioisotope technologies were being used to promote Namibia's 
socio-economic development in the areas of mining and processing of mineral 
resources, manufacturing, agriculture, hydrology and primary health care. Namibia was 
grateful to the Agency for its continued support and advice in those areas. 
53. Anumberoftechnicalco-operationprojects-relatingtothecountry'sradiation 
protection infrastructure, the diagnosis of animal diseases, animal nutrition, the 
upgrading ofa radioimmunoassaylaboratory, the establishment ofa basicradiotherapy 
unit, and the creation of a uranium database -were currently under way. 
54. In the field of animal disease control, progress had been made in the 
development ofserologicaland molecularbiologicaltechniques in an effort toeliminate 
the need for the cordon sanitaire, separating the south of Namibia from the north, 
where farmers were prevented from participating in the meat markets because of the 
prevalence of contagious bovine pleuropneumonia. The Agency had helped to train 
technicians and had supplied the Central Veterinary Laboratory with the necessary 
equipment for performing tests to improve disease control. 
55. Namibia was also very grateful to the Agency for providing assistance in the 
planning and construction of a radiotherapy centre, which was urgently needed, and 
for providing expert missions to help establish the country's radiation protection 
infrastructure. The radiotherapy centre, due to be completed towards the end of the 
year, would provide services to other countries in the region. 
56. An international meeting on the use of radiation for the detection of diamonds 
concealed on humans had been held in Namibia in collaboration with the Agency, and 
Namibia looked forward to further co-operation in the safe use of radiation for nonmedical 
purposes. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 17 

57. Other areas of particular interest to Namibia included the establishment of the 
basic infrastructure needed to use radioisotope techniques to study infectious tropical 
diseases and disorders resulting from malnutrition and micronutrient deficiency, as well 
as the production of potable water through the desalination of sea water or by other 
means. 
58. Mr. FRANK (Israel), after welcoming the Republic of Moldova as a new 
member of the Agency, said that the new Government in Israel had made clear its 
commitment to the peace process in the Middle East and had emphasized the 
importance of enhancing the security of all countries as well as of the region as a 
whole. Though the peace process had experienced some difficulties, vigorous efforts 
were now under way to revitalize it. Much had been accomplished in recent years, 
but an arduous road still lay ahead. Determination, goodwill, patience and restraint 
were required from all parties involved. 
59. Some States in the region continued to distance themselves from the peace 
process, still denied Israel's right to exist, refused to renounce war as a means of 
settling disputes, and attempted to impede the peace process by means of terror and 
violence, either directly or through proxies. The recent additional revelations 
concerning Iraq's plans and capabilities for weapons of mass destruction, and in 
particular for biological warfare, as well as the determination of others to acquire 
weapons of mass destruction in violation of their international commitments, 
demonstrated the complex nature of the security situation in the Middle East. It was 
incumbent upon the international community to assist rather than complicate the 
difficult negotiations that were taking place in the region. It was therefore highly 
desirable to refrain from initiating actions or adopting resolutions in international 
organizations which were not consistent with the existing regional realities. 
60. In the field of global arms control, disarmament and non-proliferation efforts, 
Israel had recently launched a significant organizational and legislative initiative aimed 
at moving beyond broad policy guidelines on export control and achieving full 
adherence to the principal supplier regimes. Israel had also contributed extensively 
to the work on the CTBT. Although the text of the CTBT did not satisfactorily address 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 18 

some of Israel's major concerns, Israel had joined the broad consensus on it and 
believed that the successful conclusion of the CTBT could become a significant 
milestone in the area of international security. He urged all other countries, in 
particular the other States in the Middle East, to help make the CTBT a truly universal 
treaty. Noting that Israel had endorsed the PTBT as early as January 1964, he said 
that its decision to endorse the CTBT was a manifestation of its long-standing policy 
in the nuclear field. Israel had also been active in promoting an effective verification 
regime for the CTBT and in promoting a system of regional seismic verification. 

61. Regrettably, no progress had been made during the current year in the 
deliberations of the multilateral working group on Arms Control and Regional Security 
(ACRS). The reason for that was quite clear: no progress was possible if an attempt 
was made to impose one party's agenda on other participants. He called upon all the 
participants to renew their efforts in that important area. 
62. TurningtotheproposedresolutionontheapplicationofIAEAsafeguardsinthe 
Middle East which was before the General Conference, he noted that similar 
resolutions had been passed by consensus since 1991. In the past, Israel had joined 
the consensus on those resolutions despite their inherent deficiencies, because it saw 
the nuclear-weapon-free zone as an important element in its overall peace, security 
and arms control policy. At the same time, Israel had stated its fundamental 
reservations over the language and relevance of the resolution and had distanced itself 
from its modalities. The nuclear issue could not realistically be lifted out of the 
comprehensive framework of peace and security in the region. The primacy of the 
peace negotiations could not be undermined. Any attempts to change the text of the 
resolution which had been adopted by the preceding two sessions of the General 
Conference was bound to be counter-productive. Such changes would be detrimental 
to the peace process in that they would suggest that it could be circumvented using 
international bodies. If the consensus was to be preserved, the current text of the 
resolution should remain unchanged. 
63. Turning to the resolution on the composition of regional groups which was 
before the General Conference in connection with the item on Article VI of the Statute, 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 19 

old hostilities still remained with regard to Israel's participation in MESA. Paragraph 7 
of document GOV/2864 stated that Article VI was clearly premised upon the 
assumption that every Member State of the Agency was a member of a regional group, 
and that any Member State which was not would be ineligible to serve as a member 
of the Board and such ineligibility would be contrary to the principle of the sovereign 
equality of all Member States upon which the Agency was based and which was 
enshrined in Article IV.C of the Statute. The Director General's report also stated that 
where a doubt existed as to whether a Member State belonged to a particular area, it 
was clear that the decision on that issue could not be taken solely by the Member 
States who were acknowledged as being within that area, since that might result in 
the State in question being excluded from all areas. Under such circumstances, it was 
the joint responsibility of the Board and the General Conference to determine whether 
a State fell within a particular area. 

64. Certain Member States of the MESA area had attempted to deny Israel's basic 
rights and the General Conference had an obligation to intervene and redress the 
situation. Not to do so would be to yield to political coercion. He urged the General 
Conference to take practical steps to end the discrimination against Israel and restore 
its sovereign equality inside the Agency. How was it possible to ignore obvious 
geographical and political facts in the Middle East and at the same time support 
resolutions such as the one on the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East, 
which pertained to the region as a whole? The General Conference should not 
become an arena for political protests or a venue for political discrimination. That 
would not be consistent with the Agency's responsibility and activities as provided for 
in its Statute. 
65. The plans to strengthen the effectiveness of safeguards had been one of the 
major issues on the Agency's agenda in recent years. Israel supported in principle the 
strengthening of safeguards, and it found Programme 93+2 a commendable effort. 
However, that Programme could not offer any lasting guarantees unless the political 
will was there. In that regard, the experience of UNSCOM should serve as a warning. 
The main goal of Programme 93+2 was to provide credible assurance of the 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 20 

non-diversion of nuclear material from declared activities and of the absence of any 
undeclared nuclear activities. With regard to assurance of the absence of undeclared 
activities in a country, such assurance could only be provided if comprehensive 
safeguards were in force and therefore could not apply to countries with INFCIRC/66type 
agreements. As to the need to ensure that declared nuclear material was not 
being diverted to non-peaceful purposes, unlike document INFCIRC/153, document 
INFCIRC/66 already went beyond limiting safeguards exclusively to nuclear materials 
and there was therefore no need to resort to complementary legal authority. The 
possibility mentioned in the Director General's report in document GOV/2863 of 
providing information about export licences was worth considering. While 
Programme 93+2 might, under certain conditions, improve safeguards, precautions had 
to be taken to prevent complacency. 

66. Illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources had been an 
issue of concern in recent years. Israel attached great importance to the efforts to 
combat illicit trafficking and commended the activities undertaken by the Secretariat 
in that regard and described in document GC(40)/15. He encouraged the Agency to 
continue its work in that area. 
67. Finally, noting that the General Conference was taking place at a time of 
tremendous global and regional changes, he said that it was essential to enable the 
Agency to concentrate its efforts on carrying out its statutory tasks. He hoped that in 
the coming months the peace process in the Middle East would move forward and that 
true confidence and reconciliation among all States in the region would overcome old 
suspicions and hostility. The Agency and the General Conference could assist by 
standing squarely behind the primacy of the peace process. 
68. Mr. CHAUNY de 
PORTURAS-HOYLE (Peru) joined other speakers in 
welcoming the Republic of Moldova as a new Member State of the Agency. 

69. Peru had supported the recent General Assembly resolution on the CTBT. That 
Treaty constituted a vital step towards achieving the most prized objectives of the 
Agency: non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, and a more secure world free from the 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 21 

threat of nuclear confrontation and where the utilization of nuclear energy for 
exclusively peaceful purposes could be fully realized. 

70. Fifty years previously, the world had been shaken by the bombs which had 
been dropped on Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The nuclear era had started badly. Since 
that time, most of humanity had associated nuclear energy with mass destruction. 
However, the peaceful use of reactors -to generate electricity for example -was of 
vital importance since it was quite clear that the burning of fossil or biomass fuels was 
not sustainable and needed to be drastically reduced. Where there was not a 
sufficient number of waterfalls, the only alternative capable of meeting the energy 
demand of large urban populations was nuclear energy. Despite the negative publicity 
it had received, nuclear energy had an impeccable safety record in countries which 
had a good grasp of the technology. It was also highly competitive in price and, 
contrary to what its detractors would have people believe, it had a minimal 
environmental impact. 
71. Peru had signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency guaranteeing that its 
nuclear activities were exclusively for peaceful purposes and ensuring the necessary 
transparency in those activities. Peru therefore supported Programme 93+2, which 
aimed at improving the effectiveness of safeguards. In the negotiations surrounding 
that initiative, he hoped to see a clear expression of political will and good faith, and 
a firm commitment from all States to nuclear non-proliferation. The expectations and 
rights ofthe non-nuclear-weapon States should be recognized with a balanced sharing 
of the burden of the new responsibilities and respect for the sovereignty of States and 
for confidentiality. He also hoped that the new mechanisms would constitute a 
decisive step towards international disarmament. 
72. Peru was also following with great interest the negotiations on amendments to 
the Agency's Statute, and in particular those relating to a modification of the current 
composition of the Board of Governors. Outside the developed world, Latin America 
occupied a leading position in the use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. Any 
extension of the membership of the Board should take account of that fact and ensure 
greater representation of the Latin American region. Major changes had taken place 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 22 

in the international situation in recent years, which the Agency could not ignore. He 
therefore welcomed the initiatives which were under consideration and hoped that 
they would bear fruit in the near future. 

73. The Government of Peru was most appreciative of the technical assistance 
which it received from the Agency and hoped that those activities would be 
maintained at the level they had reached in recent years. It had recently made serious 
efforts to meet its financial obligations to the Agency, including the payment of its 
assessed programme costs. 
74. Since the preceding General Conference, there had been a number of 
developments in various fields. Peru had brought a multi-purpose irradiation facility 
into operation, which was the key feature of a major project on food marketing that 
would help large sectors of the population. The tissue bank, which was being run by 
the National Institute for the Child, would make the national production of biological 
tissue possible, which would generate significant foreign currency savings in the 
medium term. Work was continuing on the establishment of an inventory of 
groundwater in southern Peru, including the identification and quantification of 
exploitable water resources and an evaluation of the water resource potential of the 
whole southern part of Peru. The plans for the production of samarium-153 and 
dysprosium-165 had been consolidated. Samarium-153 was currently being used with 
great success in the treatment of cancer patients, and dysprosium-165 was being used 
in preliminary tests on human beings. The cereals programme at the National Agrarian 
University had helped enhance some improved varieties of barley. Finally, in the field 
of nuclear safety, a project to solve the contamination problems caused by mining and 
industry had been approved. 
75. The Peruvian Nuclear Energy Institute was grateful to the Agency for having 
designated Peru as the official host country of various international training events, 
including a workshop on the implementation of the ICRP-60 recommendations and the 
Basic Safety Standards, a regional workshop on the calibration and electronic 
assessment of X-ray equipment used for medical diagnosis, a regional training course 
on the use of isotope techniques in human nutrition and a regional training workshop 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 23 

on quality control of SPECT systems. Peru had also taken part in various activities 
under the ARCAL Programme. As in the past, the Peruvian Government was grateful 
to the Government of the United States of America for the extrabudgetary contributions 
which had made possible the funding of important international technical assistance 
projects. 

76. The Government of Peru reconfirmed its support for the Agency's activities and 
urged all Member States to adopt a spirit of flexibility in the various negotiations on 
the structure, role and functions of the Agency with a view to achieving a better world, 
free of the threat of nuclear destruction, where the enormous benefits of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy could be enjoyed by all. 
77. Mr. NGWE (Myanmar) warmly welcomed the Republic of Moldova as a 
new member of the Agency. His delegation appreciated the very important role played 
by the Agency in promoting international co-operation for the development of nuclear 
science and technology, nuclear disarmament, nuclear safety and safeguards. 
78. SinceattendingthefirstInternationalConferenceonthePeacefulUsesofAtomic 
Energy and becoming a member of the Agency in 1957, Myanmar had participated in 
various activities to promote the peaceful uses of atomic energy. After signing the NPT 
Treaty in 1992, his country had concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency 
and in 1994 it had become a member of the RCA with a view to co-operating more 
actively within the Asia and Pacific region in the development of nuclear science and 
technology. Myanmar had also welcomed the signature of the South East Asian 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty in Bangkok at the end of 1995. 
79. His country believed that the world community would eventually reach a 
consensus on the total elimination of all nuclear weapons. The recent adoption of the 
CTBT by the General Assembly was a milestone in that direction. Myanmar hoped that 
all the nuclear-weapon States would abide by the Treaty. In addition, it welcomed 
the forthcoming entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, to which it was 
considering becoming a party. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 24 

80. Irradiation techniques were being applied to improve crop yields in Myanmar. 
A good quality and high-yielding species of rice had been successfully developed and 
introduced in Myanmar and the country's scientists were now working, in co-operation 
with the Agency, on the application of similar techniques to improve bean and pulse 
production. Nuclear techniques were also being used in the diagnosis of livestock 
diseases, as well as to improve the breeding efficiency of cattle. 
81. Myanmar was undergoing a transition to a market economy and efforts were 
being made to increase prosperity. Nonetheless, its people were aware of the need to 
protect the environment and a major environmental improvement project was currently 
under way to afforest and increase the availability of water in the nine arid districts 
of Myanmar's central zone. Nuclear techniques used in the exploration and 
management of hydrological resources would be relevant to those efforts. Other areas 
where nuclear techniques were having an increasing impact were medicine, where 
attempts were being made to produce radiation sterilized tissue grafts, and industry, 
where technologies such as rubber vulcanization and food irradiation had recently 
been introduced. As industry developed, so the demand for energy would grow. 
Although it possessed a vast hydroelectric potential, Myanmar was also investigating 
the benefits of nuclear power. The increasing use of nuclear applications in Myanmar, 
both in the public and the private sector, meant that there was a need for an adequate 
radiation protection infrastructure. Aradiation protection law had already been drafted 
and was expected to come into force in the near future. 
82. Myanmar, which was making efforts to catch up with countries more advanced 
in the peaceful uses of nuclear technology, was grateful for the assistance it had 
received -and hoped to continue receiving -from the Agency. His country firmly 
believed in the values upheld by the Agency and Myanmar would never seek to 
compromise the principle that nuclear energy must be used solely for peaceful 
purposes and for the benefit of mankind. 
83. Ms. KAWONZA (Zimbabwe) welcomed the Agency's increasing 
commitment to the promotion of nuclear applications in the economic and social 
development of the developing countries, especially on the African continent. She also 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 25 

appreciated the progress it had made in assisting Member States to establish a sound 
radiation protection and radioactive waste management infrastructure. For its part, 
Zimbabwe had resolved to expand its radiation protection service commensurate with 
the increasing demands being made of it. 

84. Zimbabwe had been encouraged by the efforts to improve the Agency's 
technical assistance programme through the timely implementation of project activities 
identified within the Country Programme Frameworks in such areas as agriculture, 
human health, water resources and management, and the building of national 
capabilities. Her Government was grateful to the Agency for the benefits gained by 
Zimbabwe's subsistence farming community from that programme and looked forward 
to taking part in a Model Project on biofertilizers, which should make a significant 
contribution to cereal production and the prosperity of small farms in rural Zimbabwe. 
Her country had participated in regional projects on such topics as communicable 
diseases and immunoassay. Furthermore, as soon as the necessary domestic 
formalities had been completed, Zimbabwe would submit to the Agency its application 
to join AFRA. On the subject of Africa, she welcomed the fact that most of the African 
nations -amongst them Zimbabwe -had signed the Pelindaba Treaty, proclaiming 
Africa a nuclear-weapon-free zone. 
85. She recognized that the tardy payment or failure to pay contributions to the TCF 
by the majority of the developing countries, which nevertheless benefited from the 
transfer of advanced technologies through the Agency's technical assistance 
programme, had undesirable financial implications on the Agency's budget. However, 
measures to resolve that issue should not compromise the promotion of the application 
of nuclear techniques in developing countries. The Agency should consider carefully 
the possible repercussions of proposed measures on the momentum and achievements 
of its technical co-operation programme and should explore, together with the 
Agency's major budget contributors, other -more persuasive -ways of recovering TCF 
arrears. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 26 

86. One of the subjects of concern to her delegation was the privatization of nuclear 
power plants and it believed that any such moves should be debated under the 
auspices of the Agency before being implemented in any Member State. 
87. Finally, she noted that by the end of the current session of the General 
Conference, Member States would have a clear idea of the Agency's direction and focus 
in the coming years with regard to the promotion of the peaceful application of nuclear 
techniques to help resolve the world's development problems. 
88. Mr. EL-NOAIMI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya) said that the world was facing 
major economic difficulties that called for urgent national and international action to 
promote economic and social development in such key areas as the environment, 
health, food supplies and water resources. The Agency had an important role to play 
in that regard. His country, which was severely hampered by the punitive economic 
sanctions imposed on it, was grateful for the Agency's technical co-operation in 
technology transfer and the provision of expert assistance for projects of direct benefit 
to the population such as the improvement of barley varieties and the production of 
radiopharmaceuticals. 
89. The unjust sanctions imposed on the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had adversely 
affected its participation in many international organizations, including the Agency. 
He urged the Agency to take steps to eliminate the restrictions imposed on the transfer 
of technology to his own country and those in similar circumstances so that they could 
use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. The attempt to deprive developing countries 
of the benefits of nuclear energy was a breach of the Agency's Statute. 
90. Turning to a problem of concern to many African countries, he said that Africa's 
shortage of water resources could be alleviated by the use of nuclear technology for 
groundwater prospecting and desalination of sea water. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
had been among the first to recognize the potential of the desalination of sea water 
in 1989, channelling large-scale human and financial resources into a project in that 
field. It intended to continue with its efforts and examine all options for co-operation 
with the Agency. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 27 

91. His country welcomed the Agency's action to strengthen the safeguards system 
under Programme 93+2, which was the cornerstone of international efforts aimed at 
the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. His country had consistently called for the 
elimination of all weapons of mass destruction from the international community and 
had fully implemented the Part 1 measures of Programme 93+2. Most of the measures 
proposed under Part 2 called for new legislation or changes in existing laws, which 
was a lengthy process, particularly in a country such as his own where power was 
vested in the people and all new legislation required popular endorsement at various 
levels of the decision-making process before being promulgated. The Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya therefore considered that implementation of the measures in question 
should be postponed until the necessary local legislation had been promulgated or 
should be implemented in individual States in the light of existing legislation and 
extended to other States on completion of the requisite legislative procedures. At all 
events, he stressed the universality of Programme 93+2, which must be implemented 
without discrimination. In his own region, Israel possessed an arsenal of weapons of 
mass destruction that was not subject to a safeguards agreement or to international 
control. As there was no guarantee that Israel would refrain from using such weapons, 
his country considered that the world should be freed of all weapons of mass 
destruction before the proposed safeguards system was implemented. Only then 
would the Agency's efforts gain real credibility and only then would small countries 
be confident that their development programmes and plans were safe. 
92. Some nuclear-weapon States accused his country of possessing nuclear 
materials for nuclear weapons production and programmes that violated the NPT. 
Those accusations constituted systematic intimidation by States that were determined 
to sabotage his country's future and to thwart its efforts to achieve higher living 
standards through the peaceful use of nuclear energy in such areas as hydrology and 
medicine. The clearest evidence of such terrorism against his country was the recent 
announcement by the States in question of their plans for nuclear bombardment of the 
tunnels employed for the great man-made river project in the Tarhunah region on the 
pretext that they were being used to build a gas production plant. Many delegations 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 28 

had visited the site and confirmed that those accusations were groundless and that the 
purpose of the tunnels was to convey drinking water and water for irrigation and 
industrial purposes to populated areas. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, a small country 
with limited material and technical resources, had signed a safeguards agreement with 
the Agency under which regular inspections were conducted. The Agency therefore 
had an obligation to put a stop once and for all to the deliberate terrorism against his 
country. The sole purpose of safeguards seemed to be to perpetuate the domination 
of nuclear-weapon States. If the Agency really wished to establish a workable 
safeguards system, it must put an end to discriminatory policies and apply its 
programme to all countries. 

93. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya supported the establishment of a nuclear-weaponfree 
zone in the Middle East, but recognized that that goal could never be attained so 
long as one party in the region possessed huge arsenals of nuclear and conventional 
weapons. It was therefore essential to destroy those weapons and oblige Israel to 
submit its nuclear facilities to Agency safeguards in accordance with the NPT. The fact 
that major nuclear powers continued to aid and abet Israel left his country in some 
doubt as to the seriousness of the international community's efforts and its ability to 
address such issues effectively. For its part, Africa had set an example to the rest of 
the world with the establishment of an African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty, 
which demonstrated Africa's awareness of the importance of international peace and 
security. 
94. One way of building confidence and enhancing the Agency's role would be to 
provide for equitable representation of developing countries in the Agency and their 
full involvement in policy-and decision-making. He supported the demand for 
expansion of the Board of Governors to ensure better representation of Africa, Asia and 
Latin America and to reflect changes in the membership of the Agency and in the 
world nuclear community. Such a reform would enhance the Board's efficiency and 
credibility as well as its ability to take important decisions. He trusted that the 
consultations on the amendment of Article VI of the Statute would lead to a settlement 
of the issue by consensus. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya had also consistently called 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 29 

for an increase in the number of senior Agency staff from developing countries in view 
of the considerable expertise that was currently available in those countries. 

95. Mr. DIAS (Sri Lanka), after welcoming the Republic of Moldova as a new 
member of the Agency, said that the current session of the General Conference, like 
the previous one, had been preceded earlier in the year by the signing of an important 
multilateral document in New York. The previous year had seen the indefinite 
extension of the NPT, while in the current year the document in question was the 
CTBT recently endorsed by the United Nations General Assembly. 
96. Several aspects of the CTBT were disappointing to his Government. Firstly, it 
would have preferred a text that incorporated specific measures to achieve nuclear 
disarmament and the elimination of nuclear weapons. Secondly, the Treaty's scope 
was confined to test explosions only and did not extend to non-explosive testing and 
vertical proliferation concerns. Thirdly, it had expected that the Executive Council and 
other organizational bodies responsible for the Treaty's administration would be more 
equitable in their geographical representation. Finally, his Government felt that the 
Treaty might entail an erosion of the sovereign right of countries to decide for 
themselves how and when to subscribe to international treaties. Despite those 
drawbacks, Sri Lanka had supported the adoption of the CTBT, since it was a specific 
measure to eliminate underground nuclear test explosions and a step forward in the 
disarmament process. His Government had also offered to make available a seismic 
monitoring station for use as part of the CTBT verification system and expected that the 
Agency's longstanding experience ofverification activities would facilitate considerably 
the efforts to make that system multilateral. 
97. With regard to illicit trafficking in nuclear material, his delegation commended 
the Secretariat for its continued efforts to develop countermeasures and the action it 
had taken to establish a database. The abundance of radioactive material, the easy 
access gained to it by criminal elements, and its potential for use as a means of mass 
contamination by terrorist groups all highlighted the need to strengthen the 
international regime to prevent such activities. The Agency's efforts notwithstanding, 
its Member States should do more to strengthen bilateral and regional co-operation 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 30 

among themselves in order to share information, expertise and experience on illicit 
trafficking and terrorist activities, and those countries which espoused terrorism as a 
means of achieving political aims should be denied access to nuclear material. The 
series of anti-terrorist measures recently announced by the G-7 countries offered a 
good model for developing further international co-operation in that area. 

98. Having commended the countries of the African region on establishing a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa on the basis of consensus, he said that he would 
like to comment on aspects of Sri Lanka's atomic energy programme. His Government 
had recognized the potential of nuclear technology in the context of national 
development and had allocated money to Sri Lanka's Atomic Energy Authority in order 
to develop the national infrastructure. Sri Lanka had no large nuclear facilities and its 
nuclear activities were mainly concentrated in industry, medicine and agriculture. In 
recent years, the Atomic Energy Authority had given highest priority to strengthening 
its radiation protection programme through the recruitment of additional staff and the 
acquisition of hardware. It would thus soon be possible to monitor all radiation 
workers regularly. Moreover, it was mandatory for all users of radiation and 
radioisotopes to be licensed by the Atomic Energy Authority and periodic safety 
inspections of their facilities were carried out. An emergency response plan was being 
developed and by the end of 1997 Sri Lanka would be able to comply fully with the 
Basic Safety Standards. 
99. Over the past year, Sri Lanka had completed a number of successful projects, 
including the establishment of a human tissue bank and further upgrading of its 
nuclear imaging facilities. However, further expansion of the RIA facilities was 
necessary, as the existing RIA laboratories were still unable to cope with the demand. 
In the industrial sector, considerable gains had resulted from the introduction of NDT 
technology, and nuclear analytical techniques were being used for environmental 
monitoring and quality control of products. In the area of agriculture, new varieties of 
peanut and sesame had been developed through radiation-induced mutations, and the 
application of nuclear techniques had led to further improvements in crop production 
and animal production and health. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 31 

100. Sri Lanka took a keen interest in the development of small-and medium-power 
reactors, since its national grid was too small to be connected to one of the 
commercially available nuclear reactors. Although several designs of SMPRs had been 
introducedhitherto, nonehadbeencommerciallydeveloped. Anumberofdeveloping 
countries would stand to gain if SMPRs became commercially available. 
101. His Government noted with satisfaction the level of maturity reached in a wide 
range of activities by the RCA after almost 25 years' existence. Nevertheless, the RCA 
Member States and the Agency would need to step up their efforts in order to guide 
the Programme into the next century -the former by accepting greater responsibility 
for project management and the latter by taking appropriate action to ensure the 
maximum effectiveness of its RCA management structure. 
102. Sri Lanka's Atomic Energy Authority would continue to pursue environmentally 
friendly policies in striving to improve the nation's way of life through the application 
of nuclear science and technology. Despite the constraints it experienced in trying to 
realize those objectives as a developing country, Sri Lanka continued to make voluntary 
contributions to the Agency. 
103. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his Government's active support for the Agency's 
programmes aimed at promoting the application of nuclear science and technology for 
development and noted that without such assistance, developing countries such as Sri 
Lanka would have made very little progress. 
104. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said that the Agency's most important task was 
the application of safeguards to prevent the diversion of nuclear materials for military 
purposes. Unfortunately, the present system had some loopholes -of which Iraq and 
the DPRK had taken advantage. Programme 93+2 had therefore been developed to 
strengthen the system and enable the Agency to detect undeclared nuclear facilities. 
He hoped that the additional protocol relating to Part 2 measures would soon be 
adopted and that Programme 93+2 would enjoy universality. 
105. KuwaitwelcomedtherecentadoptionoftheCTBTbytheGeneralAssemblyand 
hoped that it would not only enter into force soon, but also be the prelude to global 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 32 

disarmament. It was also pleased to note that the Convention on Nuclear Safety would 
shortly enter into force. 

106. Signing of the South East Asian Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty and the 
Pelindaba Treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, marked a 
significant step forward in nuclear arms control. Kuwait hoped that the Middle East 
region would follow suit. However, Israel's refusal to join the NPT and to submit its 
nuclear installations to Agency safeguards was hindering that process. Furthermore, 
it was imperative that the Iraqi Government refrain from its irresponsible behaviour, 
which was leading to a loss of the necessary mutual confidence. He urged the Director 
General to continue his efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle 
East, and looked forward to the elimination of not only nuclear, but all kinds of, 
weapons of mass destruction in that region. 
107. Iraq was persisting in its policy of showing contempt for the resolutions of the 
Security Council and the General Conference. Since the thirty-ninth session of the 
General Conference, facts had emerged proving beyond any doubt that Iraq had made 
several covert attempts to obtain nuclear weapons. On page 3 of the report on the 
twenty-eighth on-site inspection in Iraq, contained in document GOV/INF/781, it was 
stated that Iraq had acknowledged for the first time that the activities carried out by 
the Fourth Group, initially at the Iraqi Atomic Energy Commission, Tuwaitha, and later 
at Al Atheer, were for the direct purpose of producing nuclear weapons and not as 
previously asserted merely to define, through studies and experimentation, the 
necessary capabilities that would have been required in the event of a political 
decision to embark upon the production of nuclear weapons. Furthermore, Iraq was 
carrying out research in the field of centrifuge enrichment and was conducting 
experiments to develop a nuclear warhead delivery system. With foreign assistance, 
Iraq had acquired a supercritical machine for continuous nuclear reactions -as stated 
in paragraph 15 of the report on the twenty-ninth inspection contained in document 
GOV/INF/783. It had also imported 180 gyroscopes for launching long-range missiles, 
knowing that such missiles could carry nuclear warheads. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 33 

108. As the Executive Chairman of UNSCOM had stated at the beginning of 
September, the Iraqi régime was still hiding forbidden weapons, including long-range 
missiles, which threatened the security of its neighbours. Iraq continued to hinder the 
work of the inspection teams by denying access to a number of sites. That had led to 
the adoption of Security Council resolution 1060(1996) deploring Iraq's failure to 
comply with Security Council resolutions 687, 707 and 715 and demanding its full cooperation 
with UNSCOM. On 23 August 1996 the President of the Security Council had 
described Iraq's conduct as a gross violation of its obligations under Security Council 
resolutions 687, 707 and 715 and had called upon Iraq to grant the Special 
Commission's inspection teams immediate, unconditional and unrestricted access to all 
areas they wished to inspect. 
109. Prolongation of the economic sanctions imposed by the Security Council and the 
delay in implementation of Security Council resolution 986 -the so-called oil-for-food 
resolution-wereclearproofofIraq'scontinuedintransigence. Furthermore,paragraph 
27 of the report by the Director General on the implementation of United Nations 
Security Council resolutions relating to Iraq, contained in document GC(40)/13, stated 
that the IAEA was conscious that the expertise and know-how acquired by Iraqi 
scientists and engineers could provide an adequate base for re-constituting a nuclearweapons-
oriented programme and noted that a continuing high level of vigilance was 
necessary to avert that risk. Kuwait welcomed the Agency's ongoing verification and 
monitoring in Iraq, and urged it to be cautious and keep the Iraqi nuclear file open. 
Close co-operation between the Agency and Member States would guarantee 
implementation of the export/import mechanism, adopted under Security Council 
resolution 1051(1996), which aimed to prevent Iraq from obtaining materials to 
develop an arsenal of weapons of mass destruction. Recent events proving the 
aggressive nature of the Iraqi régime had made it imperative for all States and 
international organizations to join efforts to deal with the problem. 
110. Turning to the composition of regional groups, he said that the primary 
responsibility for decisions concerning such groups lay with the respective groups, as 
had been agreed by the General Conference in resolution GC(39)/RES/22. 

GC(40)/OR.7 
page 34 

Furthermore, it was difficult to take any decision in that regard so long as Article VI of 
the Statute was being amended. Amendment of that Article could lead to an increase 
in the number of seats on the Board and hence in the number of seats allocated to 
each regional group. 

111. With regard to personnel policy, Kuwait urged the Agency to give fair 
opportunities to all countries, taking into consideration the following four criteria: 
equitable geographical distribution, increase in the representation of the developing 
countries, increase in the representation of women, and the contributions to the 
Agency's Regular Budget, taking due account of the need to ensure efficiency. Finally, 
he called upon the Director General to pay particular attention to applications 
submitted by developing countries which were either not represented or were underrepresented. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

1.25 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
April 1997 
GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL 

Original: FRENCH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 19 September 1996, at 3.5 p.m. 


President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 
Item 


of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1995 (continued) 1-95 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Bosnia and Herzegovina 1 -10 
Greece 11 -24 
Saudi Arabia 25 -29 
Romania 30 -40 
Bangladesh 41 -46 
Estonia 47 -53 
Guatemala 54 -63 
Uruguay 64 -75 
Luxembourg 76 -81 
Albania 82 -89 
Portugal 90 -95 

8 Election of Members to the Board of Governors 96 -112 

[*] GC(40)/1. 

96-03377 (XXVII) 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.8 
page 2 

Abbreviations used in this record 
ARCAL Regional Co-operative Arrangements for the Promotion of Nuclear 
Science and Technology in Latin America 
Basic Safety 
Standards International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against 
Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 
CTBT Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
CTBTO Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty Organization 
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
NPT Review and 
E x t e n s i o n C o n f e r e n c e 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Rarotonga Treaty South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
RCA Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
R&D Research and development 
TCDC Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Tlatelolco Treaty Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America 
and the Caribbean 
UNIDO United Nations Industrial Development Organization 
Vienna Convention Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage 
(May 1963) 


GC(40)/OR.8 
page 3 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1995 (GC(40)/8) (continued) 

´

1. Mr. LEKIC(Bosnia and Herzegovina), after welcoming the Republic of 
Moldova, said that Bosnia and Herzegovina had been a member of the Agency for only 
a year, and that peace, or rather the absence of war, had prevailed in his country for 
less than a year. The consequences of the brutal aggression that Bosnia and 
Herzegovina had suffered were evident throughout its territory. As the victim of such 
aggression, and having sustained enormous loss of life and considerable destruction, 
Bosnia and Herzegovina knew only too well the uses to which weapons could be put. 
It therefore felt fully entitled to appeal to the General Conference, as it had often done 
in many other cases, for nuclear energy to be used for peaceful purposes for the 
benefit of mankind, and not for destructive ends. Thus, it strongly supported the NPT 
and believed that the Agency had a vital role to play in its implementation, which 
should be supplemented by the efforts of all parties in the field of nuclear disarmament 
as well. 
2. The Agency's efforts to strengthen its safeguards system and the results it had 
achieved represented a very important contribution to the development of nuclear 
energy for peaceful purposes and constituted a means of neutralizing weapons 
programmes. It was therefore important to expand the Agency's access to relevant 
information and sites. 
3. Full support should also be given to the Agency's current or planned activities 
to combat illegal trafficking in nuclear material, which was a threat to the peaceful use 
of nuclear energy. 
4. Promoting the peaceful and safe application of nuclear technology in different 
areas such as human health, environmental protection and industry should be one of 
the Agency's main objectives, and it was one that required effective co-operation 
between Member States and also between different international organizations. The 
activities carried out by the Agency in that regard had already produced good results. 
The assistance it provided to developing countries was particularly valuable and must 
be maintained. Bosnia and Herzegovina was a developing country which had been 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 4 

devastated and it needed help in a number of areas of the Agency's activities. It had 
therefore asked for the Agency's support in implementing several projects related to 
the use of nuclear energy in the areas of health, environmental protection, industry 
and education. 

5. Bosnia and Herzegovina was experiencing severe problems owing to the 
aggression and destruction that it had suffered. In certain areas of the country which 
had been under siege for long periods -some of them for almost four years -it was 
not even possible to carry out dosimetric monitoring of radiation workers. A number 
of sealed radiation sources had been destroyed, and some had disappeared with no 
information being available as to their whereabouts. The review and updating of the 
register of radiation sources was therefore one of the highest priorities. The policy in 
ex-Yugoslavia had been such that no waste management activities had been carried 
out and no disposal facilities had been available. 
6. Before the period of aggression, Bosnia and Herzegovina had had six nuclear 
medicine clinics. Their activities had been reduced considerably for different reasons, 
including lack of material, obsolete equipment, or the departure of some of the 
specialist staff. The restoration of nuclear medicine to an acceptable level would 
enable the minimum requirements for diagnostic nuclear services to be met. Reviving 
the radiotherapy services would also improve the quality of certain treatments. 
7. The resumption and expansion of the use of isotopes for non-destructive testing 
were important to the recovery of industry in Bosnia and Herzegovina, and some 
activities were already under way in that regard. 
8. Following a request for assistance made to the Agency, a fact-finding mission 
had been sent to Sarajevo, although at that time travelling within the country had still 
been difficult. Bosnia and Herzegovina appreciated the Agency's decision and the 
efforts made by the mission. After that visit, the mission had submitted a report and 
recommendations on projects to be undertaken under the technical assistance and cooperation 
programme. Several expert missions had also been organized. Bosnia and 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 5 

Herzegovina hoped that the recommendations made by those missions would be 
accepted and that implementation of the projects could begin as soon as possible. 

9. In addition, Bosnia and Herzegovina would like to participate in some of the 
regional projects concerned with radiation monitoring and protection, and human 
resources development. It would also welcome bilateral co-operation and support from 
Member States. In order to co-ordinate all the activities in that area, the Government 
had established the Committee for Atomic Energy. 
10. In conclusion, he reaffirmed his country's support for the Agency and its 
objectives in connection with the peaceful use of nuclear energy and thanked the 
Agency and its staff for the help they had given to Bosnia and Herzegovina 
11. Mr. YENNIMATAS (Greece), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova to 
the Agency and having thanked the Director General and his staff for the work done 
over the past year in spite of financial constraints, said that his country fully endorsed 
the Agency's Annual Report for 1995. In addition, he associated himself with the 
statement made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the European Union. 
Since the last session of the General Conference, the international community had 
continued its efforts towards international peace and security and the Agency had 
contributed to that process in a number of its main spheres of activity. The decision 
taken in 1995 to extend the NPT indefinitely and unconditionally, the political 
commitment to conclude the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, the recent 
establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa and the progress made on 
disarmament issues placed the Agency at the forefront of international attention. 
12. The international commitment of countries to nuclear non-proliferation was 
demonstrated by their accession to the NPT and verified by the application of Agency 
safeguards. Greece had been one of the first countries to accede to the NPT and to 
accept the Agency's comprehensive safeguards. It continued to have confidence in that 
Treaty and was strongly in favour of its universality as it was bound to become the 
main cornerstone of international law in the twenty-first century. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 6 

13. In spite of the financial constraints to which the Agency had been subjected 
since 1985, its safeguards system had largely met the expectations of the international 
community during the first two decades of the NPT's existence. That was reflected in 
the Agency's safeguards conclusions and in the consensus statements made at all NPT 
review conferences. The adoption of the Principles and Objectives for Nuclear 
Non-proliferation and Disarmament at the 1995 NPTReview and Extension Conference 
had far-reaching implications for the future of the NPT. 
14. Greece supported all efforts made to strengthen the Agency's safeguards system 
and welcomed the establishment by the Board of Governors of a committee to look into 
that matter. He thanked Ambassador van Ebbenhorst Tengbergen, who had played 
a crucial role in bringing about the commitment on the part of all States to examine 
the necessary legal instrument for implementation of Part 2 of Programme 93+2. He 
hoped that the Committee would conclude its work by the end of 1996 enabling the 
Director General to implement Part 2 of Programme 93+2 in order to meet the new 
challenges. The revised safeguards system should not merely sound the alarm after 
a diversion of nuclear material had occurred. It should also provide assurances not 
only with respect to declared or clandestine activities, but also with respect to certain 
precursor activities or research activities that could indicate the existence of a nuclearweapons 
programme. In the current international climate, much more was expected 
of the Agency's safeguards system. Now that the Cold War was over, there was a 
need for a universal agreement on the importance of non-proliferation and of an 
effective and credible international safeguards system. However, the basic 
responsibility for ensuring that those objectives were attained lay with the States 
concerned. It also depended on the role of the Security Council with regard to 
non-proliferation and safeguards and on its relationship with the Agency. 
Administrative reforms within the Agency were necessary to make that new 
adjustment possible. The success of the new safeguards system depended not only 
on the sustained political commitment of national Governments, but also on the tireless 
vigilance of those responsible at the Agency. The Director General had a key role to 
play in carrying out the necessary reforms. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 7 

15. Greece felt that in order to consolidate the NPT and the Agency's safeguards 
system in future, solid progress on disarmament was necessary. During the past few 
years, changes on the political scene, which had previously been considered 
unthinkable, had already led to some progress. However, it was not enough. The 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty had not yet been adopted by consensus. The 
Greek Government and people firmly hoped that a stop would be put to nuclear testing 
and believed that early implementation of the CTBT would increase co-operation and 
confidence among States and peoples. 
16. In the interests of regional stability, thought should also be given to 
strengthening the measures to avoid the spread of ballistic missile technology and 
trade. Development of trade in ballistic missiles could easily jeopardize 
non-proliferation in the near future, particularly with regard to threshold countries. 
17. Regional non-proliferation and safeguards arrangements were already foreseen 
in various treaties. Those arrangements and the concomitant strengthening ofregional 
co-operation would be of some political interest in the case of the Middle East. If 
progress were made in the Middle East peace process, more progress could be 
expected in the area of non-proliferation and regional security. The Director General 
should spare no effort to continue his consultations with the countries of the Middle 
East and should keep the members of the Agency informed of any progress in that 
regard. The regional approach should not, however, be a substitute for an 
international non-proliferation regime. 
18. Effective control of exports of nuclear and non-nuclear material and nuclearrelated 
dual-use items was an additional means of preventing the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and strengthening the Agency's safeguards system. Greece was 
participating fully in that control mechanism and accepted that full-scope safeguards 
were a condition for nuclear supply. It believed that such a control mechanism was 
not discriminatory and had not been invented to dictate trade rules. Its main objective 
was to avoid nuclear proliferation and to provide guarantees that nuclear exports were 
purely for peaceful purposes. Greece urged all States which exported nuclear material 
or items, or were engaged in their transit, to adopt those arrangements so as to 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 8 

contribute to international efforts to ensure non-proliferation and to strengthen the 
Agency's safeguards activities. 

19. He noted with satisfaction that the Convention on Nuclear Safety would finally 
enter into force on 24 October 1996, following ratification by the required number of 
States. With regard to the convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, 
Greece had actively participated in the negotiations which should lead to its adoption. 
Nevertheless, some fundamental questions remained unresolved. The main issue 
related to spent fuel: from the legal point of view and in terms of the text under 
discussion, spent fuel should be considered as waste until it entered a reprocessing 
facility. His delegation appealed to States which opposed that view to make a serious 
effort to understand the concerns of countries like Greece. If that question could finally 
be resolved, the draft convention might soon be submitted for approval at a diplomatic 
conference. 
20. On the issue of liability for nuclear damage, the Standing Committee on Liability 
for Nuclear Damage had met a number of times without reaching a final conclusion. 
Although some progress had been made, a number of problems remained unresolved. 
Greece regretted that a number of States believed that the Standing Committee's 
current mandate only authorized it to discuss the revision of the Vienna Convention. 
In view of the fact that the lifetime of nuclear reactors in the world was increasing 
significantly and that old reactors were still in operation, representing a real danger 
for all, liability questions could not be covered by simply revising the Vienna 
Convention. A separate convention on supplementary funding was more than 
necessary. 
21. He was grateful to the Agency's Secretariat, and the Department of Technical 
Co-operation in particular, for the technical assistance provided to his country, even 
if the quality of that assistance was frequently well below that provided to countries 
with a similar or higher level of nuclear development. Greece could in fact practically 
beconsideredadonorcountry. Alargenumberofscientistsfromdevelopingcountries 
had been trained in Greece and Greek experts had participated in a number of 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 9 

technical missions organized by the Agency. However, the use of Greek experts for 
such missions could be increased. 

22. TogetherwiththecountriesoftheEuropeanUnion, Greecehadoftenexpressed 
increasing concern about illicit trafficking in nuclear material. 
23. His Government fully supported the initiative taken by the Agency in June 1995 
to seek advice on its programmes and management beyond the year 2000. Once 
again, his delegation drew attention to the problem of recruitment in the Professional 
category. Although it understood the difficulties confronting the Director General in 
that regard, it urged him to pay more attention to the qualifications of the staff who 
were recruited and to the justified complaints of some Member States. 
24. In conclusion, Greece approved the Agency's Annual Report for 1995 and the 
Programme and Budget for 1997 and 1998. While the budget should, as far as 
possible, be kept within the limits of zero real growth, that should not be to the 
detriment of the new enlarged tasks under Programme 93+2 and under the nuclear 
safety and nuclear waste management programme that might fall to the Agency as a 
result of urgent needs. He reiterated that his country's national policy was based on 
non-proliferation and nuclear safety in general, peaceful co-existence with all nations, 
in particular with its neighbours, mutual respect and co-operation. 
25. Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) said that the Agency had a vital role to play 
in promoting the nuclear option and disseminating the peaceful applications of nuclear 
techniques in developing countries. It should therefore take the necessary measures 
to deal with the potential risks of nuclear practices and illicit trafficking in nuclear 
material and other radioactive sources, to promulgate safety and radiation protection 
standards and requirements, to strive for nuclear safety and to establish an 
international regime of liability for nuclear damage. Saudi Arabia appealed to Member 
States to support the Agency in the efforts it made to those ends and to accede to the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. 
26. He was pleased to note that technical co-operation with his country was being 
carried out on a permanent basis. A regional course on assessment of potential 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 10 

radiation exposure of workers would be organized in Riyadh from 9 to 23 November 
1996. Nevertheless, it was regrettable that the financing of technical co-operation had 
not yet reached an acceptable level and was hindering the implementation of certain 
programmes. He hoped that Member States would work together to arrive at a formula 
enabling technical co-operation to be financed through the Regular Budget in such a 
way as to ensure that programmes could be implemented. 

27. With regard to the financial situation, the Agency was suffering from delays in 
the payment of contributions to the Regular Budget. Notwithstanding that insoluble 
problem, the Agency was putting forward proposals to expand safeguards activities, 
although Member States had not yet finished examining the question of their 
financing. His delegation reiterated what it had said in the Board of Governors, 
namely that it should take its time in implementing the Part 2 measures of Programme 
93+2 to enable it to examine beforehand the results of application of Part 1 of that 
Programme. Similarly, in view of the economic and political developments in Member 
States, the Agency would have to maintain zero growth in its Budget and take heed 
of the experience of UNIDO, which had managed to adapt to the situation created by 
a financial crisis lasting approximately one year. 
28. He also reaffirmed that the control mechanism foreseen in the NPT made it 
possible to verify that States were meeting their non-proliferation commitments 
without detriment to their legitimate right to use nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
Consequently, there was reason to hope that the necessary confidence would be 
achieved in the Middle East region for the establishment of peace and security through 
the accession by all the countries of the region to the NPT and their commitment to 
apply comprehensive safeguards. In the same vein, Saudi Arabia welcomed the fact 
that the General Assembly had adopted, one week before the Agency's General 
Conference, a resolution on the cessation of nuclear testing, and trusted that the States 
concerned would honour their commitments. 
29. In conclusion, he recalled his country's position with regard to the amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute, namely that Saudi Arabia was in favour of expanding the 
composition of the Board of Governors, particularly to the benefit of the Middle East 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 11 

and South Asia region, which was the most under-represented on the Board despite 
its geographical importance and the size of its population. 

30. Mr. PALADE (Romania), after welcoming the admission of the Republic of 
Moldova to the Agency, noted that the current session of the General Conference was 
taking place at a time when conditions favoured the intensification of efforts in the 
area of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy. The international community was 
in the process of adopting new and effective measures to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. Those measures constituted an important step towards the 
establishment of a denuclearized world. 
31. Having associated himself with the statement made by the delegate of Ireland 
on behalf of the European Union and associated countries, he said that with the 
commissioning in April 1995 of the first unit of the Cernavoda nuclear power plant, 
Romania had joined the group of nuclear-power producers. The unit was currently 
operating at 75% of capacity, and it was estimated that by the end of October it would 
be operating at full capacity, i.e. 660 MW(e). The event was one of special 
significance for Romania. Unit 1 of the Cernavoda plant would make a substantial 
contribution towards improving Romania's energy balance by providing some 8% of 
its annual electricity production. The plant was the result of successful collaboration 
with companies from Canada, Italy, the United States and other countries, with support 
from the Governments of Romania and the countries mentioned. Romania was also 
grateful to the Agency for the competent and effective assistance it had provided for 
the unit's commissioning. 
32. The Cernavoda plant had to operate safely and without harming the 
environment, and the Romanian Government was aware of its responsibility in that 
regard. The fabrication process at the Pitesti nuclear fuel plant had been developed 
with those considerations in mind. Romania hoped that for the construction and 
commissioning, by the year 2000, of Unit 2 of the Cernavoda nuclear power plant, it 
would again receive technical assistance from the Agency. Such assistance was 
particularly important in view of the difficult conditions that Romania was experiencing 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 12 

owing to the fact that it was in a period of transition. The assistance would also make 
it possible to strengthen Romania's nuclear supervisory and licensing body. 

33. At present, the main objectives of Romania's National Atomic Energy Agency 
were: evaluation of the nuclear fuel cycle for CANDU reactors and identification of 
solutions for the nuclear facilities at the Cernavoda plant; evaluation of the possible 
options for improving performance and nuclear safety in CANDU-type nuclear power 
plants; and assessment of the possibilities for participation by Romanian industry in 
the construction of units 2, 3, 4 and 5 of the Cernavoda plant. 
34. Over the past year, Romania had continued its peaceful nuclear activities 
relating to reactor physics, materials physics, radiobiology, radioecology and the use 
of isotopes and radiation, in areas such as agriculture, medicine, industry and 
hydrology. For Romania, the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
programme remained a very effective means of technology transfer that was beneficial 
to the development of the nuclear sector in Romania. Given the problems that it was 
currently facing, Romania would like the technical assistance it received to be 
increased in 1997, or at least maintained at the same level as in 1996. 
35. Pursuant to a resolution adopted by the thirty-ninth regular session of the 
Agency's General Conference, Romania's National Atomic Energy Agency had provided 
the Secretariat with a list of Romanian experts who could be assigned to Agency 
technical co-operation activities. Romania hoped that the Agency would make efficient 
use of their services. The intention was to contribute to the promotion of the peaceful 
utilization of nuclear energy in other countries. 
36. Romania fully supported the measures by which the Agency intended to 
strengthen the non-proliferation regime in the context of the indefinite extension of 
the NPT. It was determined to continue applying in good faith the measures provided 
for in Part 1 of Programme 93+2. It was granting the Agency's inspectors 
multiple-entry visas in order to enable them to carry out no-notice inspections at the 
nuclear facilities on its territory. In addition, the owners of those facilities were 
simplifying the procedure for access to locations containing nuclear material. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 13 

37. The Romanian Government had endorsed the Agency's proposed measures for 
strengthening the existing system of nuclear material accounting and control by 
submitting information on the construction and modification of nuclear facilities and 
on specific items of nuclear equipment and material. 
38. Like the European Union, Romania believed that it was important to draw up 
a draft model Protocol to the existing comprehensive safeguards agreements in order 
to improve the Agency's monitoring of nuclear material and facilities. The draft model 
Protocol submitted by the Secretariat constituted a sound basis for elaborating the final 
text. The discussions which had already taken place and the amendments submitted 
by certain delegations showed that that important problem was being handled 
responsibly. Romania hoped that at the next meetings, well-balanced formulas 
acceptable to all parties would be found so that the Protocol could be adopted as soon 
as possible by the Agency's Member States. Its adoption would constitute another very 
important step towards consolidating the non-proliferation regime. 
39. Romania supported the adoption of measures to strengthen the safe operation 
of nuclear facilities and the safe storage of nuclear waste. It welcomed the imminent 
entry into force of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and was determined to fulfil its 
responsibilities as a party to that Convention. It was also ready to contribute to the 
finalization of the Protocol to amend the Vienna Convention and to the work on the 
draft convention on supplementary funding. Likewise, it was participating in the 
negotiations to establish a convention on the safety of radioactive waste management. 
Finally, the Romanian Government was giving its full attention to the expansion of 
international co-operation to prevent illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other 
radiation sources, and to measures to combat such trafficking. 
40. In conclusion, he reiterated his delegation's support for the Agency's 
programmes and activities aimed at promoting the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy and preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
41. Mr. FAZLUR RAHMAN (Bangladesh) said that his country was committed 
both to promoting the utilization of nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 14 

and to pursuing unequivocally the goal of nuclear disarmament. He hoped that the 
international community would be able to harness the dividends of the end of the Cold 
War by establishing an environment in which countries could peacefully co-exist and 
co-operate to achieve the equitable development of all nations. The vast majority of 
the global population, particularly in the developing countries, was still deprived of the 
benefits of science and technology. Since no economic growth, even on a modest 
scale, was possible without an increase in energy demand, it was surprising that the 
developing countries had shown but little interest in nuclear power programmes, 
despite their obvious advantages over the alternatives. He urged the Agency to take 
the initiative in that area. It was in a good position to convince suppliers and potential 
donors of the need to increase the share of the nuclear sector in electricity generation, 
and to persuade all those involved that nuclear power was safe, economic, reliable and 
environmentally friendly, that it could be used without risk by personnel in developing 
countries, that technical options for waste management were available, and that such 
projects were financially viable. 

42. His country deeply appreciated the Agency's recent efforts relating to the 
application of reliable non-destructive nuclear techniques, in particular the use of 
radioactive tracers to assess groundwater reserves and monitor water quality and 
moisturecontentinthesoil. Athoroughknowledgeofgroundwaterreservesandtheir 
depletion and recharging patterns would enable many countries to formulate policies 
and strategies aimed at ensuring optimum and sustainable utilization of groundwater 
forthesupplyofpotablewaterandirrigation. Aseparateprogrammeofmodelstudies 
on groundwater in deltaic formations would benefit many countries. Bangladesh, 
which suffered from acute water shortages, eagerly looked forward to Agency 
participation in a programme of that kind. 
43. Bangladesh was proud to be among the first 25 States which had ratified, 
accepted or approved the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and it welcomed the fact that 
the latter would enter into force in October 1996. Nuclear safety activities in 
Bangladesh had intensified since the enactment in 1993 of the nuclear Safety and 
Radiation control law. In connection with that law nuclear regulations had been 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 15 

drafted in line with the Agency's Basic Safety Standards. The authorities were in the 
process of strengthening the infrastructure and training the necessary staff. 
Bangladesh looked forward to receiving Agency assistance with the implementation 
of the Convention. 

44. His country was sincerely grateful to the Agency for the support it had given to 
its various national R&D programmes on the peaceful uses of atomic energy. It was 
endeavouring to use the results of those programmes in various sectors: application 
of non-destructive testing techniques in industry, provision of health care through 
nuclear medicine centres and the Institute of Nuclear Medicine, elementary analyses, 
maintenance of electronic equipment, environmental monitoring, radiation protection 
and food preservation. It continued to attach great importance to the Agency's 
technical assistance programme. The support which the latter had provided over the 
years was a testimony to the mutual trust that existed between his country and the 
Agency. He hoped that that assistance would continue to grow and diversify. 
45. Bangladesh was actively involved in the various activities which were being 
conducted under the RCA, in particular the co-ordinated research programmes. Those 
activities should be strengthened since they offered opportunities for exchange of 
experience at a regional level. In that regard, he mentioned the projects relating to 
the application of nuclear techniques in industry, medicine, agriculture and other 
sectors, and the project on energy and nuclear power. With respect to the latter 
project, he felt that it should be expanded to help countries participating in the RCA 
meet the needs of their energy development programmes. His country was making a 
modest contribution to the Agency's technical co-operation programme by making 
available its experts and training facilities, in line with the spirit of TCDC. 
46. His country had always paid its contributions to the Technical Co-operation 
Fund in full and had pledged the full amount for 1997. In conclusion, he welcomed 
the Republic of Moldova as a new member of the Agency, and congratulated the 
Agency on its fortieth anniversary. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 16 

47. Mr. NIITENBERG (Estonia), after welcoming the Republic of Moldova as 
a new member of the Agency, reconfirmed his country's full support for the cause of 
nuclear disarmament. In the preceding year, during the thirty-ninth session of the 
Agency's General Conference, several delegations had welcomed the results of the NPT 
Review and Extension Conference and had deplored the continuation of nuclear 
weapons testing. During the current session, they were welcoming the broad 
adherence to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, including that of the five 
nuclear-weapon States, while deploring the failure to reach consensus at the 
Conference on Disarmament and at the United Nations General Assembly. 
Nevertheless, remarkable progress had been made in nuclear disarmament since the 
preceding session of the General Conference and all were in favour of the early entry 
into force of the CTBT. 
48. As an associated member of the European Union, Estonia supported the 
statement which had been made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the 
Union. The problems in Estonia which came within the Agency's scope of activities 
were: the presence of military nuclear facilities inherited from the past, inadequate 
storage and disposal facilities for radioactive waste, uranium ore mining and processing 
tailings and the resultant contamination of the north-east part of the country. 
49. All those problems required Agency intervention at different levels: the drafting 
of basic legal texts, the provision of expert services to develop technical solutions and, 
lastly and most importantly, the provision of assistance with the implementation of 
those solutions. Estonia was grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had provided 
in the past and looked forward to fruitful co-operation in the future. The Agency's 
programmes of assistance to States in Central and Eastern Europe which had either 
been implemented or which were being developed gave grounds for optimism in that 
regard. 
50. Estonia was situated in a region where there was a threat of illicit trafficking 
in radioactive and nuclear material. For that reason, it had strengthened its border and 
customs controls. International co-operation on the tightening of such controls was 
one way of fighting the proliferation of nuclear weapons. His country had participated 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 17 

in the drafting of the convention on the safety of radioactive waste management, 
paying special attention to the problems of radioactive waste of military origin and to 
the suppression of illicit transboundary trafficking in radioactive waste and nuclear 
material. It hoped that the conclusion of the drafting process would not be delayed 
by the absence of consensus on those issues. 

51. Guaranteeing an environmentally clean Baltic Sea area had been the focus of 
the working group on nuclear and radiation safety of the Committee of Senior Officials 
of the Council of the Baltic Sea States. After defuelling the two nuclear submarine 
reactors in Estonia, his country, in collaboration with eight other Baltic Sea States, had 
been concentrating on the safety problems posed by operating nuclear power plants. 
52. Presenting the goals of Estonia's foreign policy in the nuclear safety area, he 
noted that the establishment of a reliable global safeguards system was the most 
important task of the future. Only a reliable safeguards system could eliminate the 
danger of nuclear terrorism, which had acquired an even greater priority than the risk 
of global nuclear war. Estonia fully supported Programme 93+2 and was ready to 
collaborate on the implementation of Part 1 and Part 2 of that Programme. 
53. In conclusion, he paid tribute to the competent and devoted work of the Director 
General and the staff of the Agency. 
54. Mr. JUAREZ TOLEDO (Guatemala), after welcoming the Republic of 
Moldova as a new member of the Agency, said that his country was of the opinion that 
nuclear energy applications made a valuable contribution to its development and 
helped extend the benefits of that development more swiftly to its population. When 
the General Directorate for Nuclear Energy (DGEN) had initiated its first projects to 
promote nuclear techniques 14 years previously, it had been careful to ensure 
adequate radiologicalprotection ofthe population, the environment and occupationally 
exposed staff. A legal framework for radiation protection was in force to ensure that 
those objectives were met. 
55. Guatemala was demonstrating its commitment to continued development of 
nuclear techniques by organizing national and regional courses and by receiving 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 18 

fellowship holders. That co-operation also helped enhance the knowledge, technical 
assistance, equipment and guidance which had been provided to Guatemala by the 
Agency and a number of friendly countries. 

56. Reaffirming Guatemala's support for the ARCAL programme, he noted that his 
country had been selected on several occasions to organize regional meetings, and that 
it had tried to prove itself worthy of that honour by ensuring a high level of 
organization. 
57. With regard to nuclear medicine, the nuclear medicine unit of the San Juan de 
Dios General Hospital was performing dynamic scintigraphy studies for diagnostic 
purposes with a view to ensuring that therapy was effective. 
58. In the agricultural sector, the DGEN had developed improved plant varieties 
using biotechnology and radiation-induced mutation. The agricultural research that 
had been carried out had helped improve the nutritional quality of the bean, which 
was part of the staple diet of the Guatemalan population, and to produce varieties of 
wheat that were more resistant to the mechanical effects of wind, thereby yielding 
better harvests. Varieties of sugar cane with a higher yield had also been produced. 
59. In the industrial sector, the DGENhad established a nuclear analysis laboratory, 
a non-destructive testing laboratory and a gamma spectrometry laboratory. The 
nuclear analysis laboratory was capable of performing fast qualitative and quantitative 
multi-element analyses for the metallurgical, mining, food and petroleum industries. 
The non-destructive testing laboratory, which offered techniques for the monitoring of 
metallic parts and structures, was currently working on a quality control programme 
for propane gas bottles. The gamma spectrometry laboratory was implementing 
radiological monitoring programmes in the country by taking soil, water and food 
samples with a view to detecting any radioactive discharges from nuclear power plants 
in neighbouring countries. In addition, it was responsible for certifying that foodstuffs 
from countries where nuclear accidents had occurred were not radioactively 
contaminated. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 19 

60. With regard to the environment, the use of traditional chemical techniques and 
the development of techniques such as those employing radioactive tracers had made 
possible studies of contamination and eutrophication in various bodies of water in the 
country. In particular, liquid waste discharged in the north and south of Guatemala 
City and the quality of water supplies to the city had been characterized in order to 
determine to what extent they were contaminated by the cholera morbus bacillus and 
to perform studies of small-scale treatment of waste water using irradiation. 
61. In the field of radiation protection, the Guatemalan Government had 
promulgated the nuclear law and regulations on licensing, and it was in the process 
of issuing regulations on radioactive waste, radiation protection and the transport of 
radioactive material. The Government intended to use that legislation to strengthen 
radiation safety programmes in order to meet the country's needs in that area. With 
regard to radioactive waste, the construction of a management and storage centre was 
nearing completion and it was expected that it would enter into service in 1997. That 
centre would collect all radioactive material which was no longer being used and 
which had already been located and recorded. In addition, the licensing process had 
been initiated for radiodiagnostic facilities in the public hospital network, which were 
one of the main sources of exposure for the public. 
62. The collaboration of the Agency had contributed substantially to the 
development of nuclear applications in Guatemala. Consequently, it was the wish of 
the Guatemalan Government that a balance should be maintained in the distribution 
of the Agency's resources so that the maximum number of requests for assistance could 
be met. Moreover, it was committed to supporting technical assistance projects in 
order to ensure that the planned objectives were achieved. 
63. In conclusion, on behalf of the Guatemalan Government and people, he thanked 
the Agency sincerely for its assistance and commended the Director General and his 
staff on their efforts and the results they had achieved during the preceding year. 
64. Mr. CIBILS (Uruguay) thanked the Director General for his clear and 
comprehensive report and commended the Secretariat on the unremitting efforts it was 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 20 

making to enable the General Conference to proceed with its usual success. He also 
welcomed the Republic of Moldova to the Agency. 

65. Uruguay was particularly pleased that the Convention on Nuclear Safety would 
enter into force the following month. The various provisions and obligations foreseen 
under the Convention would help increase public confidence in nuclear energy. 
66. With regard to safeguards, the necessary complement to nuclear safety, the 
Secretariat's efforts to move ahead with Programme 93+2 were especially 
commendable. That Programme represented a challenge that Member States should 
take up in order to increase the effectiveness of an activity that all deemed to be vital 
to the maintenance of world peace. His delegation wholeheartedly supported what 
had already been said by other delegations regarding the importance of the 
universality and transparency of safeguards. It also reiterated its concern about the 
possible impact of the costs of implementing Programme 93+2 on the resources 
earmarked for the transfer of technology to developing countries. 
67. His delegation had been pleased to learn that the nuclear-weapons States were 
negotiating with the Agency ways of exercising greater control over their fissile 
material. It hoped that those initiatives would help achieve the objective of total 
nuclear disarmament. In that regard, it welcomed the fact that the CTBTO Secretariat 
would have its seat in Vienna. 
68. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, his delegation would 
support any solution which did not mean a reduction in the representation of the 
developing countries, particularly of those in Latin America, and it supported, in 
principle, the view that the number of members of the Board should correspond to 
approximately one third of the number of Agency Member States. He took the 
opportunity to reiterate that it was unacceptable to differentiate between the opinions 
of States on the basis of their economic capability or their level of nuclear 
development. Account should continue to be taken of other criteria which had been 
shown to be equally valid. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 21 

69. With regard to technical co-operation, he said that his country considered itself 
a privileged beneficiary of the various services offered by the Agency. Uruguay 
thanked the Departments of the Agency, particularly the Department of Technical Co-
operation and the Department of Research and Isotopes, the Departments with which 
it maintained the closest contacts. It also appreciated the devotion and competence 
demonstrated by the Agency's staff in carrying out their functions. 
70. He was grateful to all those countries which paid voluntary contributions to the 
Technical Co-operation Fund and underlined in particular the efforts made by countries 
with modest economic resources. His Government would do its best to pay the 
contributions pledged by Uruguay as soon as possible. 
71. Uruguay firmly supported the regional efforts undertaken since 1984, when the 
ARCAL programme had been created, and was looking forward to the meetings to 
consider the future of that programme. The strong impetus that ARCAL had given to 
regional co-operation could only strengthen the capability of Latin America and the 
Caribbean, help promote other bilateral initiatives and even encourage subregional 
initiatives. 
72. He also took the opportunity to express Uruguay's gratitude for the considerable 
support it had received from foreign companies and organizations over the past year, 
particularly ENRESA (the Spanish National Radioactive Waste Company), the Spanish 
Nuclear Safety Council and the French Commissariat à l'énergie atomique. 
73. Uruguaywasundertakingvariousmeasurestostrengthenallaspectsofradiation 
safety. Adraft law to establish an appropriate legal framework in that area was being 
examined by the Uruguayan Parliament. Uruguay was also at an advanced stage in 
implementation of a programme to find a definitive solution to the problem of 
radioactive waste, which, although the quantities involved were small, was of great 
public concern. With valuable co-operation from the Agency, it was in the process of 
resolving various radiation protection problems and anticipated completing that task 
in the coming year. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 22 

74. Uruguay was training its staff and building up its technical equipment in a 
number of fields of the application of nuclear techniques through various national and 
regional projects. Uruguayan technicians had gained a well-earned regional and 
international reputation and were ready to provide their services to any country which 
needed them. 
75. In conclusion, he reaffirmed that his country was proud to be a member of the 
Agency, an organization which throughout the forty years of its existence had shown 
that it was capable of making major contributions to the well-being of humanity 
through a technology which, because it seemed mysterious to the common man, gave 
rise to negative discussions and campaigns which should be fought. Uruguay 
undertook to carry on contributing to the Agency's outstanding work. 
76. Mr. KAYSER (Luxembourg), fullyendorsingthestatementmadebyIreland 
on behalf of the European Union and associated countries, said that Luxembourg, as 
a non-nuclear country but with an extremely large nuclear power plant right at its 
border, was very interested in the Agency's activities in the fields of nuclear safety and 
liability for nuclear damage. 
77. Luxembourg had therefore taken an active part in the elaboration of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, which it had signed in 1994 and which would enter 
into force on 24 October 1996. One of the main elements of that Convention was 
periodic review of national reports on the safety of nuclear power plants in order to 
verify compliance by all the Contracting Parties with its provisions. The preparatory 
meeting, which would have to be held in the course of the following seven months, 
would inter alia establish the modalities for reviewing national reports at the meetings 
of the Contracting Parties. Those meetings should ensure both in-depth and effective 
review and transparency. Luxembourg also felt it was important that its experts had 
the right to participate in the review of the national reports of countries of the region 
and, in general, of countries of its choice. 
78. As to liability for nuclear damage, and in particular the draft Protocol amending 
the Vienna Convention and the draft convention on supplementary funding, the 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 23 

Standing Committee had indeed made some progress, but a number of key problems 
had not yet been resolved satisfactorily. His delegation could not subscribe to certain 
tendencies whereby nuclear damage requiring compensation was defined differently 
in the two above-mentioned legal instruments and definitions even diverged within 
the same instrument, namely the draft convention on supplementary funding, 
depending on whether national or international funds were to be distributed. It hoped 
that good sense would prevail and that inspiration would be drawn from recent 
international conventions with respect to the definition of damage to be compensated. 

79. With regard to the strengthening of the safeguards system, and particularly 
Part 2 of Programme 93+2, the problem was to give the Agency the necessary means 
to detect clandestine nuclear activities. In order to do so -and as confirmed by 
international experience -States had to provide the Agency with additional 
information on their nuclear activities and their exports and imports, and the Agency 
should be granted additional powers to carry out, if necessary, inspections at both 
undeclared and nuclear sites. 
80. His delegation therefore appealed to all States, including the nuclear-weapon 
States, to take an active part in that strengthened regime in the future, because it was 
only on the basis of such a universal and just regime that the international community 
could attain the goal it had set itself. Such an international regime also required that 
States themselves controlled the nuclear or dual-use material and equipment that it 
exported or which was in transit in their territory. Luxembourg had established the 
necessary legislation and structures to carry out that type of control. 
81. In conclusion, Luxembourg was convinced that implementation of international 
and national non-proliferation measures as a whole would help contribute effectively 
to peace and security. 
82. Mr. MAZI (Albania), having welcomed the Republic of Moldova to the 
Agency, recalled that Albania had been benefiting from the Agency's co-operation and 
assistance for 20 years. Although a founding member of the Agency, it had not really 
participated in the Agency's programmes until the mid-1970's. That situation was by 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 24 

no means the fault of the Agency, but attributable to Albania's total voluntary isolation. 
In 1973-74 Albania had taken the first steps to carry out a tiny project in the field of 
nuclear medicine and had started sending Albanian specialists on training courses. 
In the 1980s technical assistance officers had opened the way to various projects: 
utilization of nuclear techniques in agriculture, nuclear analytical techniques, 
measurement of environmental radioactivity, radiation protection and training of local 
experts in related fields. By the end of the 1980s, exchanges with the Agency had 
increased considerably. The Institute of Nuclear Physics at the Academy of Sciences 
in Tirana, the national focal point for the transfer of nuclear know-how, had -through 
its very close and effective co-operation with the Agency and local research 
establishments -enabled Albania inter alia to gain expertise in isotope methods to 
study water and mineral resources, to set up a nuclear medicine service at the Central 
University Hospital in the capital, to use irradiation to improve polymer quality, and to 
apply radiobiological techniques. It was currently extending the application and 
improving the treatment of radiopharmaceuticals, creating an effective network for 
environmental monitoring and the control of radioactivity in foodstuffs for import and 
export, and carrying out sedimentology studies. 

83. In addition, Albania was one of the first countries where a Model Project 
concept had been implemented. The commitment of both the Agency and the 
Albanian Government to the success of the Model Project on radiation protection 
infrastructure strengthening had ensured considerable progress, which augured well 
for the future. 
84. Albania considered regional co-operation to be a very positive development, 
particularly with regard to regional projects, which -it went without saying -were 
extremely useful. He thanked the Department of Technical Co-operation for the 
tremendous efforts it had made to bring that co-operation up to a satisfactory level, 
although the interests of the different countries could and should be given more 
consideration and be better harmonized within the framework of that co-operation. 
85. Albania was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance it had provided 
in the transfer of technology, information and training of specialists in fields of 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 25 

particular interest for the utilization of national resources. While much had been done 
with regard to the training of specialists by or through the Agency, more remained to 
be done. Sometimes progress was smooth, but sometimes it was seriously hampered, 
even by some very close and friendly countries which confronted Albanian experts 
with administrative obstacles, even when the necessary documents had been provided 
by the Agency. Albania hoped that that situation could be remedied. 

86. Albania currently had no nuclear programme or nuclear reactors. Nevertheless, 
it followed closely and supported the Agency's very diversified activities, which, 
despite major difficulties that sometimes arose were very fruitful. It would continue 
to support those activities, convinced that the Agency was making an enormous 
contribution to the peaceful use of the atom. 
87. While supporting the Agency's activities in general, Albania was particularly 
appreciative of the work of the working group on Article VI of the Statute. It believed 
that it was time that the Board properly reflected the Agency's membership and for 
specific steps to be taken in that direction. For that reason Albania had co-sponsored 
the draft resolution presented by Morocco. 
88. For basically technical reasons, and because of the wide-ranging reforms it had 
had to make to its national legislation over the past four years, Albania had not been 
able to sign many of the conventions in Agency-related fields of activity. It was not, 
however, in any way opposed to those conventions. The problem was in no way 
attributable to political motivations, but was simply a bureaucratic one which the 
Government planned to deal with as soon as the elaboration of its internal legislation 
allowed it. The Agency would be regularly informed of progress in that regard. 
89. In conclusion, his delegation shared the Director General's concerns about 
contributions. Albania had not paid its contributions in full but, in spite of its economic 
difficulties, had taken steps to pay part of its arrears. He assured the Director General 
and the General Conference that his country would continue to attach particular 
importance to that matter and would in due course make every effort to meet its 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 26 

commitments. In the meantime, Albania would continue to play as active a role as 
possible in the Agency's activities and to lend them its full support. 

90. Mr. de 
MENDONÇA E MOURA (Portugal) welcomed the Republic of 
Moldova as a new member of the Agency and fully associated himself with the 
statement made by the representative of Ireland on behalf of the European Union. 

91. Having supported the indefinite extension of the NPT, the cornerstone of the 
international non-proliferation regime, Portugal was pleased to note that the number 
of nuclear-weapon-free zones was increasing. It welcomed the signature by France 
and the United Kingdom of the Protocols to the Rarotonga Treaty, as well as the 
conclusion of the Treaty on the South-East Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, the 
consolidation of the Tlatelolco Treaty and, above all, the signature of the Pelindaba 
Treaty, which was of relevance to a continent with which Portugal had special ties of 
friendship and solidarity. He hoped that those developments would continue and that 
the Director General would maintain his efforts in that direction. 
92. Portugal was also extremely pleased to welcome the entry into force of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, which it had signed in October 1994 and which was 
being ratified. That Convention signalled major progress towards the establishment 
of a global nuclear safety system which, he hoped, would soon be supplemented by 
other similar international instruments such as the convention on the safety of 
radioactive waste management, the text of which was being drawn up by specialists 
who had met on a number of occasions. The spirit of co-operation between Agency 
members should lead to satisfactory solutions which, without underestimating the 
complex technical and financial problems that needed to be overcome, would help 
respond to the legitimate concerns of the general public. Aspects relating to military 
waste and the management of spent fuel should also be reviewed and resolved in the 
same spirit of conciliation. 
93. Portugal had benefited from the Agency's co-operation, which had helped it 
develop its technical capabilities with regard to the peaceful utilization of nuclear 
energy. While it supported the Agency's activities in that field and welcomed, in 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 27 

particular, the establishment of the Standing Advisory Group on Technical Assistance 
and Co-operation and the introduction of model projects, it also hoped that criteria 
enabling prior evaluation of technical co-operation projects would be clearly defined 
in order to find a balance between the needs of beneficiary countries and the priorities 
of the Agency's technical co-operation programme. Portugal was ready to support the 
Agencyin its promotionalactivities, particularlythrough the organization offellowships 
and by making its experts available for training activities. 

94. He drew particular attention to the programme to combat the Mediterranean 
fruitfly using the sterile insect technique, which was about to be implemented on 
Madeira. The experience thus gained in Portugal could be applied by the Agency in 
many other countries. 
95. Portugal was participating actively in the work of the International Consultative 
Group on Food Irradiation, established within the framework of Agency and FAO joint 
activities. It was soon to host two meetings of experts on that topic; it was an area 
of activity which raised great hopes and which could have an important economic 
impact. Finally, his delegation drew attention to the problem of the lack of potable 
water which was becoming more and more acute in the entire world. Desertification 
was on the increase, aggravating the economic and social problems of the countries 
affected. Portugal was therefore following with great interest Agency activities relating 
to the production of potable water and intensive use of isotope hydrology in the 
management of water resources. 
ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (GC(40)/7 and 24) 

96. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1989 the General Conference had 
approved a procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate 
or candidates from a particular area, no secret ballot was held. That procedure 
considerably facilitated the efficient use of the General Conference's time. He therefore 
proposed that Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, which 
provided that elections to the Board should be by secret ballot, be suspended in 
respect of those areas for which there was agreement. 

GC(40)/OR.8 
page 28 

97. He was happy to report that Member States had reached agreement for all the 
areas, which would contribute to the smooth functioning of the General Conference 
and help gain time. Drawing attention to document GC(40)/7, containing a list of the 
Agency Member States which the Board of Governors had designated to serve on the 
Board from the end of the present session until the end of the 1997 session, he 
recalled that, under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, he had to indicate to the 
General Conference those elective places on the Board which had to be filled. Having 
drawn attention to document GC(40)/24 he noted that paragraph 2 of that document 
indicated the number of Member States to be elected for each area so as to ensure that 
the Board was constituted in accordance with Article VI.A of the Statute and pointed 
out that the so-called "floating" seat would now be filled by a Member State from 
South East Asia and the Pacific. Paragraph 3 gave a list of the 24 Member States 
which had either been designated by the Board of Governors in June pursuant to 
Article VI.A.1 of the Statute or elected by the General Conference in 1995 in 
accordance with Article VI.A.2 and would therefore be serving on the Board 
in 1996-97. In order to facilitate the elections, delegates had been furnished with a 
note giving the results -as far as they were known -of consultations among the 
geographical groups. He stressed that the note was informal and purely for 
information purposes. 
98. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect 
Argentina, Cuba and Colombia to the three vacant seats for Latin America. 
99. Argentina, Cuba 
and 

Colombia 

were 

duly 

elected. 

100. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect 
Belgium and Portugal to the two vacant seats for Western Europe. 
101. Belgium 
and 

Portugal were 

duly 

elected. 

102. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect the 
Czech Republic to the vacant seat for Eastern Europe. 
103. The 
Czech 

Republic 

was 

duly 

elected. 


GC(40)/OR.8 
page 29 

104. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect 
Namibia and Tunisia to the two vacant seats for Africa. 
105. Namibia and Tunisia were duly elected. 

106. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect the 
United Arab Emirates to the vacant seat for the Middle East and South East Asia. 
107. The United Arab Emirates was duly elected. 

108. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect 
Malaysia to the vacant seat for South East Asia and the Pacific. 
109. Malaysia was duly elected. 

110. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect New 
Zealand to the "floating" seat for South East Asia and the Pacific. 
111. New 
Zealand 

was 

duly 

elected. 

112. ThePRESIDENT congratulatedthe11 MemberStateswhichhadjustbeen 
elected to the Board of Governors. Under Article VI.D of the Statue they would hold 
office from the end of the current session of the General Conference to the end of the 
second regular session after next -in other words, to the end of the forty-second 
regular session in 1998. 
The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

5.10 
p.m. 

GC(40)/OR.9 
October 1996 
International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 
GENERAL Original: ENGLISH 

CONFERENCE 

FORTIETH (1996) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 20 September 1996, at 10.30 a.m. 
President: Mr. PADOLINA (Philippines) 


CONTENTS 
Item 


of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

20 
Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the 
application safeguards in connection with the Treaty on 
the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 1 -11 

21 An African Nuclear-weapon-Free Zone 12 -17 
24 Examination of delegates' credentials 18 -20 
25 Elections to the Agency's Staff Pension Committee 21 -22 
26 Report on voluntary contributions to the Technical 

Co-operation Fund for 1997 23 -24 
-Organization of business 25 -26 

[*] GC(40)/22. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document 
GC(40)/INF/13/Rev.2. 

96-03383 (XXI)

This record is subject to correction. Corrections should be submitted in one of the working languages, in a memorandum and/or 
incorporated in a copy of the record. They should be sent to the Division of Languages, International Atomic Energy Agency, 
Wagramerstrasse 5, P.O. Box 100, A-1400 Vienna, Austria. Corrections should be submitted within three weeks of the receipt 
of the record. 


GC(40)/OR.9 
page 2 

Abbreviations used in this record 
Agreed Framework Agreed Framework between the United States of America and 
the Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
DPRK Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
NPT Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
OAU Organization of African Unity 
Pelindaba Treaty African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 


GC(40)/OR.9 
page 3 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE AGENCY AND THE DEMOCRATIC 
PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA FOR THE APPLICATION OF SAFEGUARDS IN CONNECTION WITH 
THE TREATY ON THE NON-PROLIFERATION OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS (GC(40)/16 and Corr.1; 
GC(40)/33) 

1. The PRESIDENT said that since the adoption the previous year of 
resolution GC(39)/RES/3, pursuant to which the item on the implementation of the 
agreement between the Agency and the Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the 
application of safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of 
Nuclear Weapons had been placed on the General Conference's agenda, the Director 
General had reported periodically to the Board on the implementation of safeguards 
in the DPRK. The Director General had submitted to the General Conference document 
GC(40)/16, whichsummarizedthedevelopmentsofthepastyear. TheConferencealso 
had before it a draft resolution on the subject contained in document GC(40)/33. 
2. Mr. MACKINNON (Canada), presentingthedraftresolutiononbehalfofits 
sponsors, said that the resolution addressed a very important issue, namely the need 
for all Member States to comply with the legal obligations they had freely undertaken, 
and urged the DPRK to comply fully with its safeguards agreement. 
3. It was extremely important that the discussions between the Agency and the 
DPRK on outstanding safeguards issues should result in substantial progress towards 
a resolution of those issues, so that the stated intention of the DPRK to enter into full 
compliance with its safeguards agreement could be realized. The draft resolution 
contained in document GC(40)/33 aimed to encourage that process. 
4. Mr. Kun-Mo 
CHUNG (Republic of Korea) said that the issue under 
discussion had been on the agenda of the General Conference for more than four 
years. The resolution adopted the previous year with overwhelming support had 
expressed concern overthe continuing non-compliance ofthe DPRKwith its safeguards 
agreement and had called on that country to comply fully with it. The resolution had 
also urged the DPRK to co-operate fully with the Agency and, as an interim measure, 
to take all necessary steps to preserve all information about the past history of its 
activities. Since then, there had been continuing efforts by the Secretariat to resolve 


GC(40)/OR.9 
page 4 

the problem and three more rounds of technical discussions on outstanding safeguards 
issues had been held, but unfortunately no real progress had been made on most of 
the fundamental issues. There had only been limited progress on certain minor issues. 

5. Judging from the results of the past rounds of discussions, it seemed clear that 
the DPRK had no real intention of honouring its obligations under the NPT. It 
contended that it was bound only by the Agreed Framework it had signed with the 
United States. However, that contention was unacceptable. It had been made very 
clear at the time that the Agreed Framework had been arranged in October 1994 that 
it was merely a complementary measure and that the safeguards agreement between 
the DPRK and the Agency remained binding. Indeed, the validity of that agreement 
had been confirmed both by the General Conference and by the United Nations 
Security Council. Some progress had been made in the implementation of the Agreed 
Framework, but there had to be corresponding efforts on the part of the DPRK in 
implementing the safeguards agreement and the DPRK should stop resorting to 
delaying tactics and excuses. 
6. Since the DPRK continued to defy the resolutions adopted by the General 
Conference, the international community should take a firm stand. Persistent noncompliance 
on the part of that country with its safeguards agreement was a serious 
challenge to the Agency's overall safeguards system and would eventually undermine 
its authority as an international watchdog for nuclear non-proliferation, particularly at 
a time when measures to strengthen the system were being discussed. Therefore, the 
very least the Conference could do was to adopt the draft resolution contained in 
document GC(40)/33 calling upon the DPRKto comply with its safeguards agreements. 
7. Mr. LI Changhe (China) said that for some time, since the signing of the 
Agreed Framework, the Agency had been monitoring the "freeze" on nuclear activities 
in the DPRK. Several rounds of technical consultations had taken place and some 
progress had been made. He hoped that the momentum generated could be kept up, 
so that a satisfactory solution could be found. Such a solution would be conducive to 
a climate ofpeace and stability, both on the Korean Peninsula and throughoutthe world. 

GC(40)/OR.9 
page 5 

8. China had always maintained that the issue should be resolved through 
dialogue, consultation and negotiation between the parties directly concerned, and it 
was opposed to putting pressure on the DPRK and imposing sanctions. As it had 
certain reservations regarding the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/33, 
it requested that a roll-call vote be taken on it. For its part, China would abstain. 
9. The PRESIDENT invited the General Conference to proceed to a roll-call 
vote on the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/33, as requested by the 
Chinese delegation. 
10. Mr. WALKER (Australia) proposed that the vote should be deferred until 
those delegations currently attending the meeting of the Committee of the Whole could 
be present. 
11. It was agreed that the vote should be deferred. 

AN AFRICAN NUCLEAR-WEAPON-FREE ZONE (GC(40)/14 and 35) 

12. The PRESIDENT, noting that the item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(39)/RES/4 adopted by the General Conference the previous 
year, said that the Director General had submitted a report in document GC(40)/14 on 
the implementation of that resolution. Attached to that document was the Pelindaba 
text of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone, which had been adopted by the thirtyfirst 
session of the OAU Assembly of Heads of State and Governments held in Addis 
Ababa in June 1995. The General Conference also had before it document GC(40)/35, 
which contained a draft resolution submitted by South Africa on behalf of the African 
Group. 
13. Ms. MXAKATO-DISEKO (South Africa), speaking on behalf of the African 
Group, recalled that the Pelindaba text of the African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone 
Treaty had been adopted at the sixty-second session of the OAU Council of Ministers 
in June 1995 and that the Treaty had been signed in Cairo in April 1996. With the 
signing of the Pelindaba Treaty, the ideal to which Africa had aspired for so long, 
namely the denuclearization of the African continent, had become a reality. 

GC(40)/OR.9 
page 6 

14. The draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/35 encouraged African States 
to make every effort to ratify the Pelindaba Treaty as soon as possible. The Group was 
grateful to the international community and to nuclear-weapon-free States in particular 
for their support for the Treaty. It hoped that those States which had not yet signed 
it would do so at an early date. 
15. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) commended the decision by African 
leaders to adopt the Pelindaba Treaty. Adoption of that Treaty would not have been 
possible if South Africa had not agreed to give up its nuclear option and to open its 
facilities for inspection under the safeguards system. The adherence of South Africa 
to the NPT had helped to free the African continent from the nuclear threat. He hoped 
that the new Treaty would set an example which other parts of the world, notably the 
Middle East, would follow. 
16. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to adopt the 
draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/35 without a vote. 
17. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

EXAMINATION OF DELEGATES' CREDENTIALS (GC(40)/40) 

18. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had met to examine the 
credentials of all delegates, as provided for in Rule 28 of the General Conference's 
Rules of Procedure. The Committee's report was contained in document GC(40)/40. 
The Committee recommended that the Conference adopt the draft resolution contained 
in paragraph 11 of the report. Since the Committee's meeting, credentials in proper 
form had been received by the Director General in respect of the delegates of 
Argentina, the Philippines, Viet Nam and Zambia. 
19. Noting that there were no speakers, he took it that the General Conference 
wished to adopt the draft resolution contained in document GC(40)/40. 
20. It 
was 

so 

decided. 

ELECTIONS TO THE AGENCY'S STAFF PENSION COMMITTEE 


GC(40)/OR.9 
page 7 

21. The PRESIDENT recalled that the General Conference was represented 
on the Agency's Staff Pension Committee by two members -Mr. Hamada of Tunisia 
and Mr. Myck of Luxembourg -and two alternates -Mr. Campuzano Piña of Mexico and 
Mr. Servigon of the Philippines. Since Mr. Hamada, Mr. Myck and Mr. Campuzano Piña 
were leaving Vienna and would no longer be available to serve on the Committee, he 
proposed that Mr. Pecsteen of Belgium and Mr. Servigon of the Philippines be elected 
as members, and Mr. Arrouchi of Morocco and Mr. Herrera Andrade of Mexico be 
elected as alternate members. 
22. Mr. Pecsteen and Mr. Servigon were elected as members and Mr. Arrouchi and 
Mr. Herrera Andrade as alternate members to represent the General Conference on the 
Agency's 
Staff Pension 

Committee. 

REPORTONVOLUNTARYCONTRIBUTIONS TOTHETECHNICALCO-OPERATIONFUNDFOR 
1997 (GC(40)/21/Rev.4) 

23. The PRESIDENT, drawing attention to document GC(40)/21/Rev.4, said 
that by 5.30 p.m. on 19 September 1996 the voluntary contributions pledged by 
Member States to the Technical Co-operation Fund for 1997 had reached a total of US 
$8 751 593. Since then, $400 000 had been pledged by Brazil, bringing the total 
amount pledged to $9 151 593. 
24. He urged those delegations that had not done so to make their 1997 pledges 
and to pay their contributions in full at the earliest opportunity so that the Secretariat 
could submit the 1997-98 technical co-operation programme to the Technical 
Assistance and Co-operation Committee based upon reasonably assured resources and 
subsequently implement the approved programme without hindrance or uncertainty. 
ORGANIZATION OF BUSINESS 

25. The PRESIDENT suggested that the meeting be adjourned until the 
Committee of the Whole had finished its consideration of the items allocated to it. 
26. It 
was 

so 

agreed. 

The 

meeting 

rose 

at 

11.5 
a.m. 

