GC(42)/OR.1 
30 October 1998 
GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 

FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE FIRST PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Monday, 21 September 1998, at 10.20 a.m. 

Temporary President: Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland) 
President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 
Opening of the session 1-8 
1 Election of officers and appointment of the General Committee 9-21 
2 Applications for membership of the Agency 22-28 
3 Message from the Secretary-General of the United Nations 29 
4 Statement by the Director General 30-85 
6 Contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund for 1999 86 
7 General debate and Annual Report for 1997 87 - 144 
Statements by the delegates of: 
Austria 91 - 102 
Japan 103-112 
United States of America 113-132 
Republic of Korea 133 -144 
Requests for the restoration of voting rights 145 -146 
[*] GC(42)/2, Corr.1 and Add.1-2. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Revs 1-3. 
98-03442 (XXXVIII) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 


GC(42)/OR.1 
page 2 

Agreed Framework 

ARCAL 

Chemical Weapons 
Convention 

CTBT 
CTBTO 
DECADES 


DPRK 
FAO 
GRULAC 
KEDO 
MEL 
MOX 
NPT 


NPT Review and 
Extension Conference 

OSART 
Pelindaba Treaty 
R&D 
RBMK 
RCA 

SIT 
START 
TCF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

Trilateral Initiative 

UNSCOM 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Agreed Framework between the United States of America and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-BanTreaty 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
Databases and Methodologies for Comparative Assessment of Different 
Energy Sources for Electricity Generation 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
Latin American and Caribbean Group 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
Marine Environment Laboratory 
Mixed oxide 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferationof Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
African Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone Treaty 
Research and development 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Sterile insect technique 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
Trilateral Initiative launched by the Minister of the Russian Federation 
for Atomic Energy, the Secretary of Energy of the United States and the 
Agency's Director General on 17 September 1996 to consider practical 
measures for the application of IAEA verification to fissile material 
originating from nuclear weapons 
United Nations Special Commission 


GC(42)/OR.1 
page 3 

OPENING OF THE SESSION 

1. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT declared open the forty-second regular session 
of the General Conference. 
2. In accordance with Rule 48 of the Rules of Procedure of the General Conference, he 
invited delegates to observe one minute of silence dedicated to prayer or meditation. 
All present rose and stood in silence for one minute. 

3. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT expressed his gratitude for the support and 
co-operation extended to him during the forty-first session of the General Conference, a 
session that had marked important milestones not just for the Agency, but also for the entire 
world. Several important multilateral legal instruments forming a solid foundation for the 
peaceful uses of atomic energy worldwide and for the safe development of nuclear power had 
been opened for signature. 
4. Various new measures and agreements signed with the Agency had rendered safeguards, 
the physical protection of nuclear materials and the global nuclear safety system more 
effective and credible. The nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan, which had led to 
widespread expressions of condemnation, regret and concern, had revealed an urgent need for 
universal adherence to the NPT and to the CTBT. 
5. Concern about the safety of nuclear installations had stimulated research and the 
application of advanced technologies in that field. The Agency's role in supporting that 
process could not be overestimated. He personally believed that, once sufficient financial 
resources were provided by Member States, the Agency's competence should be further 
exploited in efforts to achieve a nuclear-safe world. The Agency had continued to promote 
global safety initiatives and had made significant progress in developing a safety culture. 
Nevertheless, there were still areas requiring further efforts - the safe transport of radioactive 
waste being one of them. 
6. The final years of the nineteenth century had brought a series of discoveries that could 
be regarded as the first observations and experimental results in nuclear research. One 
hundred years ago, in 1898, Marie Sklodowska-Curie and Pierre Curie had separated 
polonium and radium. That discovery and the subsequent research performed by the couple 
and by Marie Curie after the death of her husband had been enormously significant to the 
further development of nuclear sciences. Some nuclear techniques, such as radiotherapy and 
the use of radioisotopes in medicine, would not have developed to the present level without 
the pioneering work done 100 years previously. 
7. The Director General and the entire Secretariat deserved congratulations for their 
contribution to the Agency's activities over the past year, and their success in enabling the 
Agency to handle a growing number of programmes in spite of the lack of real growth in the 
budget. Some of the new challenges, such as efforts to protect nuclear materials and 
radioactive sources from illegal use and illicit trafficking, depended on additional funds 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 4 

provided through the Regular Budget or extrabudgetary support from Member States. He 
hoped that all Member States would co-operate with the Secretariat to find a solution to the 
Agency's financial problems. Under the new Director General's leadership, a management 
reform process was already under way. 

8. He wished the Director General and the Secretariat continuing success in their work and 
hoped that the Conference would have a fruitful session. A number of issues unresolved from 
the forty-first session would require further consideration. He hoped that the willingness to 
make progress demonstrated by delegates a year ago would continue in the coming week. 
ELECTION OF OFFICERS AND APPOINTMENT OF THE GENERAL COMMITTEE 

9. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT invited nominations for the office of President 
of the Conference. 
10. Mr. TRUJILLO GARCIA (Colombia), speaking on behalf of GRULAC, proposed 
Ms. Lajous Vargas (Mexico), whose diplomatic experience, leadership and negotiating 
abilities would ensure the smooth running of the General Conference. 
11. Ms. Lajous Vargas (Mexico) was elected President by acclamation. 
12. The TEMPORARY PRESIDENT, speaking on his own behalf and on behalf of all 
the delegates, congratulated Ms. Lajous Vargas on her election and wished her success in her 
task. 
Ms. Lajous Vargas (Mexico) took the Chair. 

13. The PRESIDENT said it was an honour to preside over the forty-second regular 
session of the General Conference. She thanked delegations for conferring that honour on her 
country and extended special thanks to the members of GRULAC for supporting her country's 
candidacy. She also thanked Mr. Niewodniczanski, the outgoing President, for his work at the 
forty-first regular session. 
14. Mexico had a long diplomatic tradition in the field of disarmament and nuclear 
non-proliferation and in promoting the peaceful applications of atomic energy. Mexicans had 
made exceptional contributions in that field - Alfonso Garcia Robles, for example, had been 
awarded the Nobel Prize for Peace in 1982. 
15. Mexico's commitment was shared by other countries of Latin America and 
the Caribbean. The Tlatelolco Treaty, whose adoption had been promoted by 
Alfonso Garcia Robles, among others, had been in place since 1967 as a regional legal 
instrument to promote the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. All countries of the region 
had signed it and it had served as the model for similar agreements in other geographical 
areas. The region also had an instrument - ARCAL - that provided a framework for regional 
technical co-operation projects in the nuclear field. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 5 

16. The coming week would be one of intensive work in a wide range of areas. The main 
lines of the Agency's activities for the coming year would be set down and the use of nuclear 
energy for development, technical co-operation, nuclear safety and safeguards would all be 
considered. She invited delegations to work with her to ensure the success of the 
Conference's deliberations. 
17. As the first woman to preside over the General Conference, she would do her best to 
fulfil the responsibilities entrusted to her. She hoped that her term as President of the General 
Conference would serve as an inspiration to all women working in the Agency. 
18. Turning to the election of officers and the appointment of the General Committee, she 
recalled that under Rules 34 and 40 of its Rules of Procedure, the Conference had to elect 
eight Vice-Presidents, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and five additional 
members of the General Committee, resulting with herself as Chairman in a Committee of 15. 
Since the proposed Chairman of the Committee of the Whole was from the area of South East 
Asia and the Pacific, which customarily had only one representative on the General 
Committee, it would be necessary to suspend Rules 34 and 40 in order to have seven 
Vice-Presidents and six additional members in a committee of 15. On that basis, and in the 
light of her consultations, she proposed that the delegates of Bangladesh, Cuba, the 
Netherlands, the Philippines, the Russian Federation, South Africa and the United States of 
America be elected as Vice-Presidents, that Mr. Lance Joseph of Australia be elected as 
Chairman of the Committee of the Whole and that the delegates of Croatia, Ireland, Kuwait, 
Morocco, Slovenia and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland be elected 
as additional members of the General Committee. 
19. The President's proposals were accepted. 
20. The PRESIDENT further proposed that, prior to the General Committee's meeting 
and its submission of its recommendations on the agenda, the General Conference waive 
Rule 42 and proceed with its consideration of items 2, 3, 4, 6 and 7 of the provisional agenda 
in order not to lose time. 
21. The President's proposal was accepted. 
APPLICATIONS FOR MEMBERSHIP OF THE AGENCY 
(GC(42)/3) 

22. The PRESIDENT informed delegates that the General Conference had before it an 
application for membership by Benin contained in document GC(42)/3. That application had 
been endorsed by the Board of Governors, which had also submitted a draft resolution for 
adoption by the General Conference. 
23. She assumed that the Conference wished to adopt the draft resolution by acclamation. 
24. It was so decided. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 6 

25. Mr. MEHISSOU (Benin)* expressed his Government's gratitude to the Board of 
Governors for recommending approval of, and to the General Conference for approving, 
Benin's application for membership in the Agency. Benin's decision to apply for membership 
of the Agency demonstrated its desire to participate actively in the search for peace and 
development. Its commitment to general and complete disarmament under international 
control, including that of the United Nations, had always been a feature of its foreign policy. 
It had welcomed the decision taken by the NPT Review and Extension Conference to renew 
the NPT for an indefinite period of time. It had signed the CTBT, which constituted a general 
legal framework establishing favourable conditions for the worldwide elimination of nuclearweapons 
testing, and had set in motion the ratification procedure, which would soon be 
completed. It had also signed the Pelindaba Treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free zone in 
Africa. 
26. Benin was party to a number of conventions on disarmament and international security, 
including the Chemical Weapons Convention. Furthermore, since 1993, it had provided to the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations every year the information required for the United 
Nations Register of Conventional Weapons. 
27. By joining the Agency, Benin sought to consolidate the Agency's much appreciated 
socio-economic work in developing countries, which were so greatly in need of civilian 
applications of nuclear technology in all areas. His Government hoped that such expectations 
would be met so that, in addition to the nuclear security offered by the Agency, food and 
health security would be ensured. 
28. The PRESIDENT announced that Burkina Faso, whose application for 
membership of the Agency had been approved by the General Conference in 1997, had 
deposited its instrument of acceptance of the Agency's Statute with the depositary 
Government on 14 September 1998, thereby bringing the number of members of the Agency 
to 128. 
MESSAGE FROM THE SECRETARY-GENERAL OF THE UNITED NATIONS 

29. Mr. FONDAUMIERE (Representative of the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations) read out the following message to the General Conference from the Secretary-
General of the United Nations: 
"It is my pleasure to send greetings to the forty-second regular session of the General 
Conference of the International Atomic Energy Agency. The IAEA continues to play a 
central role in meeting the challenges of our times. Its mandates and tasks remain vital 
for maintaining world peace, for preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons and 
for ensuring the peaceful and safe use of nuclear technology for sustainable 
development. Your efforts will have a direct bearing on international peace and 
prosperity. 

Speaking under Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure. 


GC(42)/OR.1 
page 7 

"This session of the General Conference takes place against the backdrop of a most 
regrettable setback in hitherto successful global efforts to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. Lest we have forgotten, or have become complacent on account of 
notable achievements, this setback is a powerful reminder that the genie cannot be put 
back in the bottle, that we must focus on the driving forces behind the acquisition of 
nuclear weapons, that we must work not only on weapons capabilities but equally on 
real and perceived insecurities. We must also reaffirm our course of action: no 
nuclear tests; no new weaponization or deployment of nuclear weapons; a working 
system of global and regional security; and nuclear disarmament at the earliest 
possible date. 

"Against that background looms large the relevance of the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime, accompanied by credible IAEA safeguards and verifications. I welcome the 
significant progress made in strengthening the safeguards system through the 
additional protocols to existing safeguards agreements. It is encouraging that 
additional protocols have been concluded or are being finalized by several countries, 
and I urge all Member States to do so. 

"An essential complement to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
is the landmark agreement on the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty. I reiterate 
my call to all countries to sign and ratify the CTBT, and I welcome the steady progress 
being made by the Provisional Technical Secretariat of the Preparatory Commission 
for the CTBTO in fully assuming its tasks. 

"Substantial improvements have also been made with respect to another central 
concern: nuclear safety. We cannot afford to neglect the tragic lessons of the 
Chernobyl disaster, and must ensure that every State conducting nuclear activities has 
a sound regulatory infrastructure and that every nuclear operator is implementing 'best 
practice' safety culture. I am pleased to note that you will, at this session, address 
further measures to strengthen international co-operation in nuclear, radiation and 
waste safety as well as safety of transport of radioactive materials. 

"An aspect of safety that has acquired great urgency of late is the illicit trafficking in 
nuclear materials by criminal elements, who ruthlessly exploit globalization and 
technological advances. With the valuable assistance of the IAEA, the international 
community must address this very real threat. 

"This is all the more important because the fully safeguarded transfer of nuclear 
technology is an essential element in the use of nuclear energy exclusively for peaceful 
purposes and sustainable development. In this regard, the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme for developing countries should be strengthened, since 
nuclear technology has the potential to make substantial contributions in areas as 
varied as the eradication of pests in Africa, geothermal energy development in Latin 
America, child nutrition in Asia and water resource management in the Middle East. 
These 'nuclear' activities should be given the full attention they deserve. 


GC(42)/OR.1 
page 8 

"The IAEA also has a role to play in encouraging the involvement of civil society in 
international affairs. Civil society has claimed, legitimately, a greater stake in global 
issues, both operationally and at the policy level. We need to bring all United Nations 
organizations closer to the people for whom they were founded. Indeed, our 
fundamental strength should be the support of the general public. 

"You have a long and complex agenda. I look forward to co-operating closely with the 
IAEA on the range of issues before you as together we pursue the goal of a safe and 
prosperous world for all of humanity. Please accept my best wishes for a successful 
conference." 

STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR GENERAL 

30. The DIRECTOR GENERAL said that the prevailing climate of change, 
uncertainty and opportunity had an impact on every aspect of the Agency's work. The urgent 
need to evolve sustainable development strategies required that objective consideration be 
given to the role of nuclear energy in such strategies. The imperative of ensuring a high level 
of safety for all nuclear facilities around the world called for the development and 
management of a comprehensive and legally binding safety regime supported by an enhanced 
safety culture. The realistic possibility, with the end of the Cold War, of curbing the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons and moving towards nuclear disarmament depended 
critically on the availability of an effective system of verification; and the need to raise the 
standard of living of the world's poorest required the efficient transfer of technology, 
including nuclear technology. 
31. Reviewing trends in global energy supply, he said that, while the growth of nuclear 
power had come to a standstill in Western Europe and North America, it was expanding in 
parts of Asia and Eastern Europe. At the end of 1997, 437 nuclear reactors operating in 
31 countries had provided about 17% of global electricity supply, slightly less than in the 
previous year. Several existing reactors were approaching the end of their design life. 
Decisions had to be made to extend their time in service, to replace them with new plants or to 
find other options. Decisions also had to be made with respect to the accumulation of spent 
fuel and radioactive waste. 
32. Global electricity demand was growing, driven mainly by developing countries with 
expanding populations. Depending on the economic growth scenario, it was expected to 
double or triple by the year 2050. Concerns about potential global warming were also 
growing. Energy produced from fossil fuels accounted for more than half of anthropogenic 
greenhouse gas emissions. By contrast, the use of nuclear power currently accounted for the 
avoidance of about 8% of global carbon emissions. Apart from nuclear or hydro power, there 
were as yet no other economically viable options for base load power generation that involved 
minimal greenhouse gas emissions. 
33. The structure of the global electricity sector was changing. In several countries, energy 
markets were being deregulated and privatized to create a more competitive energy supply 
market. Power plant operators were aiming at greater efficiency in existing plants and greater 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 9 

economy to reduce costs. On several grounds, including the comparatively high initial capital 
cost of new nuclear power plants and questions of public acceptance, new investment had 
tended to focus on combined-cycle natural gas power plants which had lower greenhouse gas 
emissions than coal or oil plants. 

34. Several challenges had emerged as a result of the foregoing changes: safe, efficient and 
competitive management of operating nuclear power plants and fuel cycle facilities now and 
in the future; ensuring that there was no sacrifice of safety for the sake of profitability; and 
making sure that commitments with respect to global environmental emissions were factored 
into objective considerations of alternative energy system options. The Agency's work in 
nuclear power reactor technology development was guided by international working groups 
which acted as forums for the exchange of information and assisted the Secretariat in planning 
and implementing activities. In the area of non-electrical applications of nuclear power, the 
Agency's programme focused on nuclear desalination. Work was also continuing on small 
and medium-sized reactors, for desalination as well as for electricity generation, either in 
remote locations or for limited electric grids. 
35. With varying degrees of urgency, both developed and developing countries were faced 
with major energy choices to meet the needs of their economies. While there were many 
reasons why national authorities and energy investors might choose the nuclear power option 
(proven technology, cost factors, environmental considerations, national security of supply), it 
was important that they should have access to tools for objective comparative assessment 
between nuclear and other sources of energy. With that in mind, and in close co-operation 
with eight other international organizations, the Agency had developed tools and 
methodologies for the comparative assessment of different energy chains and conversion 
technology options through the DECADES project. The DECADES methodological 
framework was being used by some 35 Member States to conduct their own independent 
energy option analyses. The Agency was also contributing to the Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change Third Assessment Report and to the United Nations Commission on 
Sustainable Development which would address energy issues for the first time. 
36. The choice of nuclear power and of a particular energy mix were national decisions. 
The Agency, however, had a central role to play in ensuring that nuclear power continued to 
be given a full and fair hearing and that policy-makers had an objective assessment of all the 
options available to them. Nuclear power was an important component of many national 
energy strategies, together with improvement of energy efficiency, use of renewable energy 
sources and improved use of fossil fuels through clean technologies. It was essential that the 
nuclear power option remained available and was not ruled out on subjective grounds. 
37. Spent fuel and radioactive waste management was an area of particular concern. 
Substantial quantities of spent fuel from research and test reactors had become physically 
degraded and were kept in ageing storage facilities which represented potential health, safety 
and environmental problems at many sites. In addition, spent fuel from power reactors had 
accumulated rapidly. Although existing and planned storage capacity would keep ahead of 
accumulated inventories, it was feared that resources would not be available in some countries 
to construct the planned facilities. For countries with small nuclear programmes, and 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 10 

therefore relatively small amounts of spent fuel and radioactive waste, regional co-operative 
arrangements for the management of spent fuel and waste might be an attractive prospect. 

38. The steady accumulation of plutonium in separated form and in spent fuel also deserved 
urgent attention. In the civilian sector, about 170 tonnes of separated plutonium was in 
storage. An additional 100 tonnes would be released from the military programmes of the 
United States of America and the Russian Federation, and some 1000 tonnes were contained 
in spent fuel from reactors. Three options for plutonium management were currently being 
discussed: burning in reactors, immobilization in a suitable matrix and subsequent disposal, 
and long-term storage. It was hoped that, through international co-operation, a common 
understanding would emerge on the best ways to deal with that and other fuel cycle issues. 
39. Low- and intermediate-level waste was generated both by the nuclear power sector and 
by the nuclear applications sector through the use of radioisotopes. Through the assessment 
of different technologies and the dissemination of information, the Agency was helping 
Member States to address low- and intermediate-level waste management issues. However, 
the need for Member States to develop disposal plans and operate disposal facilities remained 
an urgent matter. 
40. Experts agreed that technical solutions existed for the safe and permanent disposal of 
high-level radioactive waste. However, progress in demonstrating those solutions had not 
been as rapid as originally foreseen, with the opening of actual repositories being delayed 
again and again. One exception was the recent certification for operation of the Waste 
Isolation Pilot Plant in New Mexico for the permanent disposal of long-lived radioactive 
waste. Decisions on the final disposal of waste could be delayed but could not be avoided. 
He urged Member States to focus on what was an important and pressing issue and not to rule 
out regional or international solutions. 
41. Although the Agency's Radioactive Waste Safety Standards programme was steadily 
forging the necessary international consensus on the conditions for the safe disposal of 
radioactive waste, public opinion seemed to be increasingly reluctant to accept the technical 
advice given. A lesson to be drawn from a major international conference on the subject held 
a week previously in Hamburg, Germany, was the need for more extensive information 
exchange. The Agency was prepared to take up that challenge through the organization of a 
forum for information exchange that would be open to all parties concerned. 
42. Over the past year, the global safety record for nuclear power plants had shown 
continued improvement as a result of peer reviews, the increased safety awareness of power 
plant managers and substantial international assistance programmes to upgrade plants built to 
earlier standards. However, the Agency's annual Nuclear Safety Review gave details of other 
events concerning management practices in nuclear power plants which provided a warning 
that even well developed nuclear power programmes could experience a gradual deterioration 
in safety performance in the absence of continuous efforts to maintain and improve nuclear 
safety. Moreover, continued incidents involving radiation sources underlined the need for 
effective safety practices throughout the nuclear fuel cycle. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 11 

43. Although nuclear safety was a national responsibility, it was also a global public 
concern. The Agency's aim was to develop a comprehensive nuclear safety regime consisting 
of three elements: international agreements; safety standards; and measures to provide for the 
application of those agreements and standards. 
44. In recent years, several important international conventions, negotiated under the 
Agency's auspices, had helped to fill gaps in the international nuclear safety regime. Of 
particular interest was the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The coming months would provide 
the first test of the Convention's system of international peer review of national reports. For a 
comprehensive safety regime to be established, States had to subscribe to the conventions they 
had adopted. For example, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and 
on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, which had been opened for signature at the 
previous session of the General Conference, had been ratified by only three States. 
45. The second element of the Agency's safety programme was the development of 
internationally agreed safety standards covering nuclear safety, radiation safety, waste 
management safety and transport safety. The safety standards series represented an 
international consensus on safety requirements and their implementation. In the current 
biennium, the entire corpus of safety standards -a total of some 70 documents - was 
undergoing revision. 
46. The diplomatic conference convened in September 1997 to adopt the Joint Convention 
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management 
had also adopted a resolution relating to the transboundary movement of radioactive waste 
and spent fuel, an important issue that would be discussed again at the current session of the 
General Conference and it was to be hoped that a consensus would be reached. 
47. It was not enough to adopt safety standards and measures: priority must be given to 
their application. That was the third element of the safety programme. The Agency offered a 
wide range of services, including several peer review services, information exchange, 
education and training, and co-ordination of safety-related research and development. They 
were valuable services that all Member States should utilize. Later in 1998 the one hundredth 
OSART mission would be conducted - to the Golfech nuclear power plant in France. 
48. Agency safety services were also used to study specific issues. A comprehensive final 
report on the 1990-1998 Agency extrabudgetary programme on analysing and upgrading the 
safety levels of nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe would be issued in 1998. In response 
to a joint request by the Slovak and Austrian Governments, the Agency had assembled an 
independent group of internationally recognized experts to examine concerns about 
embrittlement of the reactor pressure vessel in Unit 1 of the Mochovce nuclear power plant. 
Also, in response to an invitation from the Government of Ukraine, the Agency had organized 
a workshop in Kiev to deal with cracking of large diameter pipes in RBMK reactors. 
49. The Secretariat was working on the year 2000 computer system problems (Y2K) that the 
Agency and Member States had to face in the near future. He had asked Departments to draw 
up action plans to assist Member States by providing guidance on the identification of 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 12 

Y2K problems and the necessary remedial action, and by offering a forum for information 
exchange. Such an action plan had already been prepared in the area of safety of nuclear 
installations and was available on the Agency's WorldAtom Internet home page. 

50. The fourth in a series of Agency assessments of radiological legacies from past military 
activities and waste disposal practices had been completed in 1998: the study of the present 
and future impact of the radiological situation at the atolls of Mururoa and Fangataufa in 
French Polynesia. The conclusion that there would not be any health effects that could be 
diagnosed or discerned attributable to exposure to the radiation from residual radioactive 
materials remaining at the atolls should provide welcome assurance to the people of the South 
Pacific region. States might wish to benefit from similar radiological studies of former 
nuclear weapon test sites to help overcome part of the legacy of the Cold War. 
51. Turning to nuclear verification, he noted that over 180 States had committed themselves 
to IAEA comprehensive safeguards. In 1997, safeguards had been applied to over 
900 facilities involving more than 10 000 days of inspection. 
52. With the approval by the Board of Governors in 1997 of the Model Additional Protocol 
to safeguards agreements, the Agency had obtained the legal authority to implement a more 
effective safeguards system. From the vantage point thus afforded, it could develop a more 
comprehensive picture than before of all nuclear activities in a State and detect and verify 
possible non-peaceful activities at an early stage. The next challenge was to ensure that all 
States concluded and implemented additional protocols. The strengthened safeguards system 
was a fundamental condition for an effective non-proliferation regime. He was pleased to 
report that good progress was being made with the conclusion of protocols. With the 
10 additional protocols already signed, and the additional protocols for 22 States that would 
probably be signed in the very near future, a considerable portion of the world's nuclear fuel 
cycle which was under comprehensive safeguards would be subject to strengthened 
safeguards. However, that was not enough. 
53. One of the main purposes of the strengthened safeguards system - to provide assurance 
about the absence of any undeclared nuclear activities in States with legally binding 
non-proliferation commitments - could be better achieved with global adherence. He 
therefore urged all States with outstanding safeguards agreements to conclude them and all 
States to accelerate their consideration of the Model Additional Protocol and enter into 
consultations with the Agency at the earliest possible opportunity. Joint action was needed to 
ensure that by the year 2000 all States had concluded outstanding safeguards agreements and 
additional protocols. 
54. In his statement to the Board of Governors in June 1998 in the context of the nuclear 
weapons tests conducted in May, he had drawn attention to the widespread concern at the 
possible erosion of the basic norm of the non-proliferation regime, namely that, pending 
nuclear disarmament, world security was better served with fewer rather than more nuclear 
weapons and nuclear-weapon States. He had also underscored the need to accelerate the 
process of nuclear disarmament. In addition to a complete ban on nuclear testing, two actions 
had always been identified as indispensable: freezing the production of fissile materials for 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 13 

weapon purposes and the gradual reduction of stockpiles of such materials, either unilaterally 
or through disarmament agreements. He was pleased to note that steps were being taken in 
both directions. 

55. In August 1998, the Conference on Disarmament had finally agreed to commence 
negotiation of a treaty prohibiting the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons or 
other nuclear explosive devices. In furtherance of United Nations General Assembly 
resolution A/RES/48/75 of 16 December 1993, he had written to the President of the 
Conference on Disarmament on 28 August 1998 to offer the Agency's assistance in 
developing the technical verification arrangements for such a treaty. 
56. Over the previous two years the Agency had been involved in discussions with the 
Russian Federation and the United States of America to develop arrangements and modalities 
for possible Agency verification in the United States and the Russian Federation that nuclear 
material transferred from the military sector to the peaceful sector remained peacefully stored 
or was rendered unusable for weapon purposes. He would meet the Russian Minister of 
Atomic Energy and the United States Secretary of Energy later that week to review progress 
and set goals for future work. 
57. He also welcomed the recent decision by the United Kingdom to be the first 
nuclear-weapon State to declare the total size of its stocks of nuclear material in both the 
civilian and military sectors. The United Kingdom had also determined that substantial 
amounts of fissile material were now surplus to its military programme and would be 
available for Agency safeguards under the voluntary-offer safeguards agreement between the 
United Kingdom and the Agency. 
58. An important issue that had to be faced urgently, if the Agency was to respond 
positively to those and other initiatives, was the question of financing. In his view, the 
establishment of a nuclear arms control verification fund based on an agreed scheme of 
assessed contributions, which could finance the verification of nuclear arms control and 
reduction measures, was one option which should be given serious consideration. He had 
been asked by the Board of Governors the previous week to prepare an options paper on the 
question of financing, a step which would hopefully speed up the process of agreement on an 
important matter. 
59. Pursuant to the mandate of the General Conference, he had, as stated in his report 
(GOV/1998/45-GC(42)/15), started consultations with States of the Middle East region, based 
on the work of his predecessor, to obtain additional and more detailed views on the early 
application of full-scope Agency safeguards to all nuclear activities in the region, as well as 
on the kind of material obligations which might eventually feature in a Middle East 
nuclear-weapon-free zone agreement. As noted in his report, although commitment to nuclear 
non-proliferation continued to be voiced by all the parties concerned, views still differed with 
regard to the modalities and timing of applying full-scope safeguards to nuclear activities in 
the region, and to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 14 

60. In the DPRK, the Agency continued to assert its right to perform inspections under the 
NPT safeguards agreement, which remained in force. At the same time, it was verifying a 
freeze of the DPRK nuclear programme at the request of the Security Council and reporting 
periodically to the Security Council and the Board of Governors. He regretted to report that 
the measure of co-operation being received from the DPRK had not increased. Three rounds 
of technical discussions had taken place since the previous session of the General Conference 
with no progress noted on any of the outstanding issues associated with eventually assessing 
the extent of the DPRK's compliance with the safeguards agreement. That included the 
preservation of information which had to remain available to enable the Agency to verify in 
the future the accuracy and completeness of the DPRK's initial declaration. 
61. The Agency's inspection and verification activities in Iraq had resulted in the 
development of a technically coherent picture of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme. 
However, as with all other Agency verification activities, a degree of uncertainty remained as 
to the completeness of the picture. Such uncertainty was inherent in any country-wide 
verification process that sought to prove the absence of readily concealable objects or 
activities. Iraq's lack of full transparency with regard to the provision of certain information 
regarding the few remaining questions relevant to the clandestine programme brought 
additional uncertainty into the picture. Nonetheless, that did not prevent full implementation 
of the Agency's plan for the ongoing monitoring and verification of Iraq's compliance with its 
obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions. 
62. Since 5 August, Iraq had suspended its co-operation with the Agency and the United 
Nations Special Commission and had provided access only to "declared sites". As a result, 
the Agency was unable to inspect any new locations or investigate the few remaining 
questions and concerns regarding Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme. Under those 
circumstances, the Agency was not able to fully implement its ongoing monitoring and 
verification plan, particularly the measures needed to ensure that the past programme would 
not be revived. Ongoing monitoring and verification constituted an integral whole and the 
assurances derived depended on the implementation of all the measures. The level of 
assurance regarding Iraq's compliance with its obligations was at present significantly 
reduced. 
63. Concluding his review of verification and safeguards priorities, he referred to the 
potential for nuclear-weapons proliferation and for threats to public safety from illicit 
trafficking in nuclear material and other radioactive sources. The Agency's illicit trafficking 
database programme had recorded continued incidents of illicit movement of nuclear material 
and other radioactive sources. In each of the previous two years, over 30 such incidents had 
been reported. Since September 1997, there had been 15 incidents involving nuclear material 
and 20 involving other radioactive sources. 
64. The Secretariat was continuing its activities to assist Member States in their efforts to 
prevent, detect and respond to theft, diversion and other unauthorized uses of nuclear material 
and other radioactive sources. In addition, at the request of the United Nations General 
Assembly, the Agency was continuing to contribute to the work of the ad hoc committee 
established by the General Assembly to deal with international terrorism. That committee was 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 15 

elaborating a draft convention on the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism and the Agency 
had to ensure that the new convention built on, and did not overlap with, the Convention on 
the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 

65. Turning to the Agency's role in the transfer of technology, he noted that meeting the 
needs and aspirations of the world's growing population called for the application of the best 
available technologies. Support for the transfer of nuclear technology for exclusively peaceful 
purposes was an integral part of the international consensus relating to the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy embodied in the Agency's Statute and the NPT, and the Agency was the principal 
vehicle for the multilateral transfer of nuclear technology. 
66. The Agency's role was to continue to ensure, where nuclear technology remained the most 
effective and appropriate technology to address a particular problem, that it was transferred in 
the most efficient, effective and safe manner. The size of the technical co-operation programme 
was modest - approximately US $80 million per year - but the impact and results had been 
outstanding. 
67. The sterile insect technique to control pests on an area-wide basis, which had been 
developed in collaboration with the FAO by the Agency's laboratories, was being increasingly 
applied in developing and developed countries. In Zanzibar, confirmation of a successful 
Agency project to eradicate the tsetse fly had enabled the Government to launch a five-year 
programme on improving livestock productivity to meet the national goal of self-sufficiency 
in milk and meat products. The experience gained with the Zanzibar project was being used 
in Ethiopia in an SIT programme that would eventually cover the entire Southern Rift Valley. 
The use of SIT as a biological technique to replace insecticide use was spreading. In the 
United States, Argentina, Israel, South Africa and Madeira, for example, the SIT was being 
applied to control the fruit fly with lower costs and increased effectiveness. 
68. In the area of human health, the Agency currently supported 40 national projects 
and 4 major regional projects to upgrade radiation therapy services and had recently assisted 
the Governments of Ghana, Ethiopia, Mongolia and Namibia in opening their first radiation 
therapy facilities. 
69. As many as 1 in 900 babies in regions with low iodine diets were born with a thyroid 
deficiency which could lead to severe mental impairment unless detected within the earliest 
days of life and treated promptly. The Agency had been supporting national and regional 
screening programmes in more than 20 developing countries, using the simple and costeffective 
radioimmunoassay technique. With the Agency's assistance, Thailand was expected 
to screen all of the country's newborn children by the year 2000 for thyroid deficiency. 
Uruguay had already reached 100% screening coverage and three other Latin American 
countries were screening over 85% of their infant population. 
70. Nuclear environmental monitoring techniques had made a major contribution to a 
regional technical co-operation project in Europe for marine environmental assessment of the 
Black Sea to determine, inter alia, post-Chernobyl radioactivity levels. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 16 

71. In the field of energy planning, the Agency was assisting Egypt and several countries in 
East Asia and the Pacific in their strategic planning for electricity generation up to the 
year 2020. The programmes took into consideration all possible options, including renewable 
energies, and placed special emphasis on the environmental impacts of different options. 
72. Through the introduction of a new process of management of co-ordinated research 
activities and a strategy for technical co-operation, the Agency was seeking to use the most 
effective and efficient methods of delivering its programme of technology transfer and had 
become an important catalyst in optimizing the efforts of others. The confidence of Member 
States, as manifested through their contributions to the expansion of Agency laboratories and 
their co-funding of specific programmes or loans to projects, testified to the value of the 
Agency's nuclear applications and technical co-operation programmes. The $8 million loan 
by the United States Department of Agriculture for the eradication of the screwworm in 
Jamaica within the next three years was an example of that confidence. 
73. However, effective planning for technical co-operation depended on the Agency being 
able to make sound forward plans on the basis of assured resources from Member States. He 
expressed appreciation to those Member States who had made extra efforts in 1998 to pledge 
and pay their contributions to the Technical Co-operation Fund and urged all Member States 
to pledge their share of the TCF for 1999 in full so that the new biennial programme could 
start with more predictable and assured resources. 
74. To continue to be able to provide high-quality services, the Agency maintained two 
world-standard scientific and service laboratories: the Marine Environment Laboratory in 
Monaco and the Seibersdorf Laboratory outside Vienna. It was appropriate, in the 
International Year of the Ocean, to highlight the unique contribution of the MEL to addressing 
the global issues of marine pollution. The forthcoming inauguration of the new premises of 
the Monaco Laboratory, with generous support from the Principality of Monaco and the 
Government of Japan, would ensure that the MEL was equipped to face the challenges of the 
next century. 
75. Throughout 1998, he had listened carefully to the views of Member States on their 
needs and priorities and their expectations from the Agency. While the emphasis differed, 
there were clearly discernible common themes: increasing demand from developing Member 
States for nuclear technology as indispensable to their process of economic and social 
development; increasing dependence on the Agency as a centre of excellence for international 
co-operation in nuclear technology; continued concern about nuclear safety, waste and 
physical protection; increasing reliance on the Agency's verification system for nuclear 
non-proliferation and the control and reduction of nuclear weapons; and an urgent need to 
establish better communication with an increasingly sceptical public. 
76. For the Agency, the implications were clear: it had to check that its programmes met 
the new priorities of Member States, to reach out more effectively to opinion leaders and civil 
society, and to achieve greater efficiency wherever possible. With those ends in view, one of 
his first acts as Director General had been to initiate a comprehensive three-level review 
process covering aspects of the Agency's management and programme. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 17 

77. The first level consisted largely of measures to improve efficiency in three areas: policy 
and co-ordination, programme development and evaluation, and procedures and personnel. In 
January 1998, he had convened a senior management conference which had led to an action 
plan for better management. Many of the initiatives had been implemented. He was placing 
particular emphasis on the creation of a "single Agency" culture to ensure that the Secretariat 
was clear on its priorities, co-ordinated in its activities and efficient in its processes. A 
Programme Co-ordination Committee and an Office of Programme Support and Evaluation 
had been established to ensure the coherence and co-ordination of all Agency programmes. 
Furthermore, the programme and budget formulation process was being adjusted to place 
greater emphasis on expected results than on financial details and to facilitate the evaluation 
of performance. 
78. Many actions had been initiated in the area of human resource management to ensure 
that human resources were better matched to programme requirements. Recruitment 
procedures had been simplified to expedite the process while preserving the requirement for 
excellence in the candidates selected. 
79. In parallel with internal management reform, he had initiated an external review of the 
Agency's overall programme by convening a senior expert group to assess priorities and 
future directions and to present recommendations in October 1998. He expected the 
programme review to contribute to the Agency's task of identifying, and building consensus 
on, priorities for the coming years. In consultation with Member States, he intended to 
prepare an Agency "medium-term strategy" which would chart the direction of the Agency 
over the next five years. 
80. The importance of public understanding of the role of nuclear energy and of the Agency 
demanded that effective public information be an integral part of the Agency's activities. 
Accordingly, the third part of the reform process was the continuing review of the role and 
management of public information and the Agency's outreach to civil society, particularly the 
nuclear, arms-control and development communities and the media, using the most modern 
and effective tools. 
81. The Agency's Internet home page received over a million "hits" each month and was 
being made more comprehensive, timely and informative. For areas where the Internet was 
not widely used, the quality and presentation of printed materials was being improved. He 
would be canvassing Member States during the months ahead about their interest in an 
expanded public information programme, including public seminars on nuclear topics. 
82. The Agency's Programme and Budget for 1999-2000 had been formulated after lengthy 
and intensive consultations with Member States. The total 1999 Regular Budget 
was $219 289 000, which was 0.1% less in real terms than in 1997. It was worrying that, 
while the Agency's role and mandated activities in verification, safety and technology transfer 
were expanding year by year, the resources available for the Regular Budget were moving in 
the opposite direction. The programme budget was a balance between priorities and 
affordability. In determining what was affordable, Member States should consider both the 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 18 

short- and long-term dividends from their investment in the Agency and focus their sights on 
the goals to be attained. 

83. The Agency's financial situation continued to be a matter of concern. Unless pending 
contributions were quickly received, it might not be possible to implement the Agency's 
programme for 1998 in full. He therefore appealed not only to the largest contributors, but to 
all Member States that were in arrears or had not yet paid their 1998 assessed contributions to 
make their payments as soon as possible. He had that morning received an indication that one 
major contributor would be paying at the end of September 1998. That was good news and he 
hoped that other Member States would follow suit. 
84. In the current period of change, uncertainty and opportunity, the Agency should be able 
to minimize uncertainties and maximize opportunities. His commitment as Director General 
was to ensure that the Agency was fully responsive to the needs of Member States, ran a 
results-oriented programme and conducted operations with maximum efficiency. 
85. Serving the Member States was a two-way process: it required dialogue and 
transparency, but it also required Member States to support the programmes and budgets they 
had approved. In short, a joint effort was needed for the Agency to meet Member States' 
requirements, an effort to which he was committed and for which he counted on Member 
States' continuing support. 
CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE TECHNICAL CO-OPERATION FUND FOR 1999 
(GC(42)/18) 

86. The PRESIDENT said that since 1982 the Agency's policy-making organs had 
observed a practice of recommending Indicative Planning Figures to serve in fixing annual 
targets for contributions to the TCF. Following the deliberations of an informal working 
group, the Board had recommended for the 1999-2000 biennium a target figure of $73 million 
in each of those years. The early pledging of contributions to the TCF greatly helped the 
Secretariat in planning the Agency's technical assistance programmes. Delegations in a 
position to do so were therefore urged to notify the Secretariat during the Conference of the 
contributions which their Governments would be making to the Fund in 1999. She would 
report at the end of the session, under a later agenda item, on the contributions which had been 
pledged up to that time. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 
(GC(42)/5) 

87. The PRESIDENT appealed for understanding and co-operation in the arrangement 
of the daily speakers' list. Adjustments had been made necessary to allow the participation of 
several Ministers and other senior officials from Member States and international 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 19 

organizations who were unable to spend the whole week in Vienna. Additional adjustments 
might be required, but she was confident that the Secretariat would do its best to cope with 
conflicting demands. She took it that the Conference was in agreement with those 
arrangements. 

88. It was so agreed. 
89. The PRESIDENT, pointing out that over 74 delegates had already inscribed their 
names on the speakers' list, said that she took it that the Conference authorized her, under 
Rule 50 of the Rules of Procedure, to limit the duration of speeches to 15 minutes, in 
accordance with past practice. 
90. It was so agreed. 
91. Ms. PRAMMER (Austria), speaking on behalf of the European Union, said that 
Bulgaria, the Czech Republic, Estonia, Hungary, Iceland, Latvia, Lithuania, Norway, Poland, 
Romania, Slovakia and Slovenia associated themselves with her statement. 
92. The Agency was widely regarded as a model international organization, and the 
European Union believed that it could look forward to the new millennium with confidence. 
The Agency had made every effort to eliminate inefficiencies and weaknesses in order to 
sustain a high level of achievement and efficiency. However, it was important that a thorough 
process of critical reappraisal of practices and procedures as well as programmes should take 
place on a continuous basis. The European Union welcomed the Director General's initiative 
in setting up a senior expert group to look at all aspects of the Agency's work, complemented 
by the work of a group of senior managers looking at management issues. Attention should 
also be given to prioritizing the Agency's activities within and between major programmes. 
93. The nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan had highlighted the importance of 
global efforts to minimize the risks of nuclear technology being misused to contribute to the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons - an area in which the Agency's expertise was constantly 
needed. The nuclear tests by India and Pakistan constituted a threat to international and 
regional peace and security, and impaired global efforts to prevent the proliferation of 
weapons of mass destruction and to bring about nuclear disarmament. The European Union 
had condemned the actions as running counter to the will expressed by the 150 signatories to 
the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty to cease the testing of nuclear explosives once 
and for all. It called on India and Pakistan to exercise utmost restraint and to avoid any 
actions which could provoke a further deterioration of the situation. 
94. The European Union remained fully committed to the implementation of the NPT and 
the CTBT as cornerstones of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and the essential 
foundations for the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. Its goal continued to be adherence by all 
countries to the NPT as it stood, without any modification. It had a strong interest in the 
peace and stability of the South Asian region, and strongly urged India and Pakistan to refrain 
from further nuclear tests and the deployment of nuclear weapons or ballistic missiles in order 
not to aggravate the persisting tensions in the region. It had taken due note of the statements 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 20 

of both sides regarding moratoriums on further nuclear tests, and believed that those 
expressions of intent should take the form of legally binding commitments. India and 
Pakistan should reconsider their nuclear policies; sign the CTBT as it stood and move to ratify 
it; exert stringent controls over the export of material, equipment and technology controlled 
under the Nuclear Suppliers Group Trigger and Dual-Use Lists and the Missile Technology 
Control Regime Annex; make a commitment neither to assemble nuclear devices nor to 
deploy them on delivery vehicles; and cease the development and deployment of ballistic 
missiles capable of delivering nuclear warheads. India and Pakistan should also accede to 
the NPT as it stood without any modification. 

95. The European Union wholeheartedly welcomed the establishment of an ad hoc 
committee to negotiate a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons 
and other nuclear explosive devices within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament, 
and particularly appreciated the fact that both India and Pakistan had joined the consensus on 
that step. It was a very encouraging sign and suggested that it might be possible to achieve 
substantial progress on other elements of the European Union's declarations. 
96. As it attached the utmost importance to the entry into force at the earliest opportunity of 
the CTBT, the European Union welcomed the recent ratifications of the Treaty by Australia, 
Brazil, Grenada, Germany, Jordan and Spain. It also welcomed the accession of Brazil to the 
NPT. 
97. The European Union was fully committed to the strengthening of the Agency's 
safeguards system and welcomed the Board's adoption of the Model Additional Protocol. The 
Council of the European Union had authorized the Commission to conclude the three 
additional protocols between the European Union Member States, the European Atomic 
Energy Community and the Agency. 
98. All States having safeguards agreements with the Agency should conclude additional 
protocols to those agreements as quickly as possible on the basis of the Model Additional 
Protocol. In particular, India, Pakistan and Israel should conclude such additional protocols 
without delay and at the same time accept full-scope Agency safeguards. The European 
Union had noted with interest Cuba's announcement of its intention to enter into negotiations 
with the Agency on the possible adoption of some of the measures provided for in the Model 
Additional Protocol. 
99. The strenuous efforts undertaken by the Agency in the context of investigating Iraq's 
clandestine nuclear programme were commendable. The Union condemned the decision by 
Iraq of 5 August 1998 to suspend co-operation with UNSCOM and the Agency, which 
constituted a totally unacceptable contravention of its obligations under Security Council 
resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding signed by its Deputy Prime Minister and 
the Secretary-General on 23 February 1998. Iraq should rescind its decision and co-operate 
fully with UNSCOM and the Agency in accordance with its obligations, and resume dialogue 
with UNSCOM and the Agency immediately. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 21 

100. Turning to the situation of safeguards implementation in the DPRK, she noted that the 
European Union continued to be concerned that the Agency could not even provide assurance 
that all the required information pertaining to the evaluation of the DPRK's initial declaration 
of nuclear activities had been preserved. The Union once more strongly urged the DPRK to 
respond forthwith to the serious concerns expressed by members of the Agency by complying 
with its safeguards commitments and co-operating fully with the Director General. 
101. It was vital to implement the highest safety standards possible and she urged all 
countries to do their utmost to operate all their nuclear facilities in line with existing 
international regulations and recommendations; the fact that the organizational meeting under 
the terms of the Convention on Nuclear Safety was to take place the following week at the 
Agency's headquarters and with its expert support was a clear sign of how seriously the 
Agency took its task to promote nuclear safety worldwide. The European Union welcomed 
the increasing number of Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety and looked 
forward to its full implementation. It attached particular importance to a frank and concise 
exchange of information and views within the framework of the review meetings under the 
Convention. 
102. Finally, speaking on behalf of Austria, she warmly welcomed all the participants and 
wished them a pleasant stay in her country's capital. 
103. Mr. TAKEYAMA (Japan), having welcomed the Republic of Benin as a new 
Member State of the Agency, said that his country greatly regretted the fact that India and 
Pakistan had conducted nuclear tests earlier in the year. Japan had urged them to cease such 
tests and to adhere unconditionally to the CTBT and the NPT. The nuclear tests posed a grave 
threat to the international nuclear non-proliferation regime and seriously undermined stability 
in South Asia. The international community should take a firm stand in its efforts to obtain a 
commitment from India and Pakistan to nuclear non-proliferation. It was for that purpose that 
Japan had initiated the convening in Tokyo of the Conference on Urgent Actions for Nuclear 
Disarmament and Non-Proliferation in August 1998. Japan also particularly welcomed the 
setting up of an ad hoc committee at the Conference on Disarmament to negotiate a fissile 
material cut-off treaty. 
104. Japan had contributed to KEDO's light-water reactor project and had endeavoured to 
help resolve the nuclear weapons development issue in the DPRK. However, the recent 
launching of a missile which had flown over Japanese territory was extremely regrettable in 
the light of efforts to secure peace and stability in the region. Japan had decided, in 
consultation with the United States, the Republic of Korea and other members of KEDO's 
Board to suspend work on the project for the time being. It was essential that the DPRK 
should comply fully with the Agency's safeguards agreement and Japan would support all 
efforts on the part of the Agency to achieve that end. 
105. In the interests of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, it was vital to dispose as 
speedily as possible of plutonium derived from dismantled nuclear weapons, while ensuring 
that it was not diverted for military purposes. While each nuclear-weapon State was 
responsible for the management of its own weapons-grade plutonium, the international 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 22 

community should give support where possible. In that connection, Japan looked forward to 
progress under the Trilateral Initiative on the part of the United States, the Russian Federation 
and the Agency to place such plutonium under Agency verification. Japan also intended to 
encourage co-operation in the construction of a storage facility for excess Russian weaponsgrade 
plutonium and in the burning of plutonium from dismantled nuclear weapons as 
mixed-oxide fuel. 

106. In recent years, the problem of global warming had given rise to serious concern, calling 
for a mobilization of efforts on a global scale. Noting that Japan had hosted the Third 
Conference of the Parties to the 1992 United Nations Framework Convention on Climate 
Change in December 1997, he said that nuclear energy would play a significant role in 
achieving the targets for greenhouse gas emissions set in the Kyoto Protocol. For its part, 
Japan intended to pursue the development and peaceful utilization of nuclear energy and 
hoped that the Agency would play a positive role in discussions in international forums on the 
role of nuclear energy in preventing global warming. 
107. He welcomed the additional protocols approved subsequent to the adoption in May 1997 
of the Model Additional Protocol as a step towards strengthening the international nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. Japan was currently engaged in negotiations with the Agency with a 
view to implementing an additional protocol in the coming fiscal year and he hoped that 
Member States which had not already done so would accept comprehensive safeguards and 
likewise conclude additional protocols. 
108. Ensuring safety was an essential prerequisite for the peaceful use of nuclear energy, and 
the Conference on Nuclear Safety in Asia, launched upon his country's initiative, was 
discussing how co-operation between countries could ensure nuclear safety in the region. In 
that connection, he greatly appreciated the Agency's extrabudgetary programme on the safety 
of nuclear installations in countries in South East Asia, the Pacific and the Far East. In 
addition, Japan was currently working with other Asian countries to prepare for the first 
review meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and was also 
contributing to the improvement of safety in nuclear power plants in the former Soviet Union 
and in countries of Central and Eastern Europe. 
109. In order to secure a stable energy supply and to reduce the environmental impact of 
radioactive waste disposal, Japan was pursuing a policy of reusing plutonium recovered from 
the reprocessing of spent fuel. Accordingly, it was promoting reprocessing in the domestic 
private sector, and was also promoting the use of MOX fuel in light-water reactors as the most 
secure way of utilizing plutonium. A new organization, the Nuclear Cycle Development 
Institute, would be established in Japan in October that year to undertake long-term research 
and development on fast breeder reactors, nuclear fuel reprocessing, and disposal of high-level 
radioactive waste. It was important that there should be complete transparency over the use of 
plutonium, and it was for that reason that Japan made public its plutonium holdings annually 
to show that it did not keep more stocks than were necessary for the scheduled 
implementation of its plan for peaceful uses. Japan also complied with the Guidelines for the 
Management of Plutonium set out in document INFCIRC/549. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 23 

110. Turning to administrative and budgetary issues, he said that he appreciated the Director 
General's efforts to achieve efficient and sound management of the Agency under the current 
austere conditions. Everything possible should be done to achieve and maintain zero nominal 
growth in the Regular Budget, and further consideration should be given to ensuring that 
funds were allocated to major programme activities that were truly necessary. Japan urged all 
Member States to pay their assessed contributions in full, and to make greater efforts to pay 
their shares of the target for voluntary contributions to the TCF. 
111. In the field of technical co-operation, Japan had carried out a number of activities, 
including the hosting of the annual International Conference on Nuclear Co-operation in Asia, 
and had contributed both human and financial resources to the TCF. It would do all it could 
to continue such co-operation in the future. 
112. The work of the Agency was crucial in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy 
and in strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Japan pledged itself to playing an 
active role in that work, and he hoped that other Member States would do likewise. 
113. Mr. RICHARDSON (United States of America) read out the following message 
from President Clinton to the General Conference: 
"On behalf of the people of the United States of America, I extend to you warm 
greetings and best wishes for a successful meeting. The 1998 General Conference 
affords us an opportunity to reflect on the important contributions of the IAEA to 
international peace and security. It gives us an opportunity to welcome 
Dr. Mohammed ElBaradei to the position of Director General. And it allows us to 
look ahead to the next millennium and to the role this Organization will play. 

"The nuclear tests recently conducted on the Asian sub-continent are chilling 
reminders of a chapter of history many of us had hoped was closed. They remind us 
also of the work that remains to be done. The entry into force of the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, universally applied, is a global priority. We must also 
achieve a global treaty ending the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons. 
And we must realise the goal of all IAEA Member States concluding additional 
protocols to their safeguards agreements by the year 2000. These are all important 
priorities. 

"The Agency's efforts to establish globally accepted nuclear safety practices and 
respond to the challenges of illicit nuclear trafficking underscore the role the IAEA can 
play to assure a safe and secure nuclear future. The IAEA's role is indispensable." 

114. As President Clinton had indicated, it was a time of great challenge and opportunity for 
the Agency and the world community, and also a time of great transition. The 50 years which 
had elapsed since the dawn of the nuclear age had been marked by nuclear peril and promise. 
The challenge of the next five decades would be to stay on the path of nuclear peace and 
prosperity. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 24 

115. Over the past 50 years, man had harnessed nuclear energy's peaceful potential and 
created norms to regulate the acquisition, transfer and control of nuclear weapons and the 
materials needed to produce them. The nuclear non-proliferation regime which had evolved 
over that time stood as an impressive global achievement symbolizing the international 
community's commitment to protecting mankind from the horror of nuclear war and reaping 
the peaceful benefits of nuclear science. That regime had withstood serious shocks, including 
those created by Iraq and the DPRK, and he was confident that it would also survive the blow 
resulting from the recent nuclear tests in South Asia. 
116. The United States stood with those countries which condemned the tests conducted by 
India and Pakistan as a threat to global security and stability. The world must not let slip the 
unique opportunity it now had to end nuclear testing for all time. He urged India and Pakistan 
to accede immediately to the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty and said that every 
effort would be made to ensure the ratification of that critically important instrument by the 
United States Senate. 
117. The first five decades of the nuclear age had left an imposing agenda for the 
international community to address over the next 50 years. It contained six key elements: the 
reduction of excessively large nuclear arsenals; the control of the vast amounts of fissile 
material released from such reductions; the conversion to peaceful purposes of complexes for 
the production of nuclear weapons; resolution of the proliferation concerns in Iraq and the 
DPRK; the challenge of managing the back end of the fuel cycle and ensuring the safe use of 
nuclear power; and the further exploitation of the reservoir of peaceful and humanitarian 
nuclear applications. 
118. Firstly, with regard to the need to reduce nuclear stockpiles, he said that after witnessing 
a massive build-up of nuclear forces over the past 50 years, the world had now entered a new 
phase of drastic and irreversible reductions. The United States and Russia had made 
significant progress under the existing arms control agreements and through unilateral steps. 
Since 1988, the United States had dismantled more than 12 000 nuclear warheads and bombs an 
average of over 100 weapons per month over 10 years. It had also eliminated more 
than 900 missile launchers and heavy bombers, comprising 90% of its non-strategic nuclear 
stockpile, and the warheads for over a dozen types of nuclear-weapon systems. The United 
States looked forward to discussions with Russia on even more extensive cuts under a 
START III agreement, once START II had been ratified by the Russian Duma. 
119. Secondly, with regard to the vast amount of fissile materials created during the nuclear 
arms race, the United States and Russia had together identified approximately 100 metric 
tonnes of plutonium and nearly 700 metric tonnes of highly enriched uranium as excess to 
their defence requirements, and had pledged never to return them to military use. Under the 
Trilateral Initiative, the United States, Russia and the Agency were designing appropriate 
verification arrangements for the excess material. Even as that work continued, excess 
material in the United States was being subjected to international monitoring. Earlier in the 
year, the Agency had verified the dilution of approximately 13 tonnes of American highly 
enriched uranium into a form of fuel which could not be used in nuclear weapons. 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 25 

120. All five nuclear-weapon States shared a commitment to making excess fissile material 
available for international inspection as soon as practicable. In that regard, he welcomed the 
United Kingdom's recent announcement identifying more than 4 tonnes of weapons-usable 
material as excess to defence needs. It was to be hoped that all the nuclear-weapon States 
would emulate that important step. At a recent Summit in Moscow, Presidents Clinton and 
Yeltsin had signed a statement of principles for long-term co-operation in disposing of excess 
plutonium under conditions of appropriate transparency and with international monitoring. 
Disposal could help pave the way for greater reductions in nuclear forces and ensure that such 
material did not fall into the hands of terrorists. The previous month, the Conference on 
Disarmament had taken the essential and long overdue step of establishing an ad hoc 
committee to negotiate a fissile material cut-off treaty, thus bringing nearer an end to the 
production of new fissile weapons material. Such a treaty was critically important, as it would 
place a ceiling on global stockpiles of military nuclear material, extend verification to 
production facilities that had never been subject to international monitoring, and freeze 
production in regions of concern. The United States expected the Agency to verify the cut-off 
treaty, and welcomed the opportunity to work with the Agency and the members of the 
Conference on Disarmament with a view to achieving a rapid conclusion to the negotiations 
on such a treaty. The United States and Russia were also working together on measures to 
help ensure that nuclear material in Russia did not fall into the hands of terrorists. 
121. The third key element related to the changing role of complexes formerly engaged in the 
production of nuclear weapons in the nuclear-weapon States. Thus, the national laboratories 
of the United States Department of Energy were now using their scientific and technical 
expertise to address global challenges such as climate change, pollution prevention and 
disease control. Such a redirection of efforts was a priority for other countries too. The 
Department of Energy was currently co-operating with Russia in developing peaceful 
employment and economic opportunities for Russian scientists formerly working on the 
development of weapons. 
122. The prevention of further nuclear proliferation, the fourth key element in the nuclear 
agenda, was a task for which all countries - not simply the nuclear-weapon States - had 
responsibility. In that regard, two cases - Iraq and the DPRK - merited special attention. In 
Iraq, the international community sought nothing less than full compliance with the relevant 
United Nations Security Council resolutions. Although the Agency had uncovered most of 
Iraq's clandestine nuclear-weapons programme, crucial questions lingered and more work 
remained to be done. 
123. The Agency's work was also not finished in the DPRK. The immediate and overriding 
objective was to maintain a total freeze on, and achieve full disclosure of, the DPRK's past 
nuclear activity. He was pleased to announce that the Department of Energy would soon 
resume canning of spent fuel which might otherwise be available for weapons use. The 
United States also continued to work with its KEDO partners in the implementation of the 
Agreed Framework. 
124. The existence of nuclear programmes in those two countries had demonstrated the 
importance of effective safeguards. The United States was proud to have been the first 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 26 

nuclear-weapon State to sign an additional protocol. Such protocols would provide the 
Agency with stronger tools for verifying compliance with the NPT. He called on all other 
States represented at the General Conference to collaborate in achieving the Director 
General's objective of having all Member States conclude additional protocols by the 
year 2000. 

125. The fifth key element of the nuclear agenda for the next 50 years resulted from the 
existence of growing stocks of separated civilian plutonium and vast inventories of spent fuel, 
and from the challenge posed by the need to ensure nuclear reactor safety. In addition, the 
very viability of nuclear power was being threatened by an absence of strategies for disposing 
of nuclear material. The task for the future was to develop internationally accepted principles, 
practices and technologies for the safe, secure and transparent disposal of civilian nuclear 
material. The existing arrangements pointed in the right direction, but more could be done. A 
useful start would be to expand the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material 
in order to establish an international, legally binding obligation to protect nuclear material in 
domestic use. 
126. All States with nuclear programmes faced problems associated with the disposal of their 
spent fuel and radioactive waste. The United States was moving forward with geological 
disposal of such materials, and he could now announce that the Department of Energy 
intended to convene a conference in 1999 on global efforts to dispose of nuclear material in 
geological repositories. The United States would share the results of its own experience and 
progress, and welcomed input from others. He invited all Member States to attend that 
conference. 
127. Agreement on strategies for managing the disposal of nuclear material was essential to 
the future of nuclear power. In the near future, the United States would launch its Nuclear 
Energy Research Initiative, intended to promote research and development on advanced 
nuclear power systems in line with United States non-proliferation, economic and 
environmental goals. The Initiative would also promote the safe operation of nuclear reactors, 
an area in which the Agency continued to play a crucial role. He welcomed the Agency's 
efforts to assist Governments in implementing strict safety standards, and commended the 
work of the Advisory Commission on Safety Standards in developing guidelines for nuclear, 
radiation, transportation and waste safety. He urged the Agency to continue its work with 
Member States in the areas of operational safety and regulatory infrastructure. 
128. The Agency's leadership in that area was further demonstrated by its efforts to address 
the nuclear safety risks associated with the year 2000 computer problem. The United States 
intended to provide the Agency with a cost-free expert to help assess those risks and 
co-ordinate appropriate responses. He invited all Member States to support the General 
Conference resolution on the year 2000 being sponsored by the United States and the Russian 
Federation. 
129. The sixth key element - exploiting the benefits of atomic energy in order to improve 
human health and welfare - implied the expansion of nuclear technical co-operation. Forty 
years previously, the Agency had initiated a programme of technical assistance whose value 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 27 

amounted to $125 000. The Agency now spent more than $60 million to help developing 
nations reap the benefits of nuclear science while adhering to internationally accepted 
radiation safety standards. 

130. In line with his country's efforts to collaborate with other nations with a view to 
increasing the availability of radioisotopes for medical purposes and reducing the cost and 
intrusiveness of such treatment, he was pleased to announce that the United States Department 
of Energy, working with Belgium and Finland, intended to supply the Agency with surplus 
radioisotopes for the production of isotope generators under the Agency's co-ordinated 
research programme involving experts from 14 nations working on the treatment of heart 
disease and cancer and the relief of bone pain. 
131. The United States also supported the Agency's vital work to ensure that radiationproducing 
devices used for peaceful purposes were handled and disposed of safely. The 
United States remained fully committed to helping the Agency exploit the peaceful potential 
of nuclear energy. Thus, in 1998 it had paid its full share of the TCF and had contributed 
millions of dollars and considerable cost-free support to various Agency activities. The 
United States would continue to provide substantial support to the Agency. 
132. Having worked throughout its history to ensure that atomic energy was used safely and 
peacefully and to administer the international safeguards system with skill and competence, 
the Agency would be called upon to do even more in the coming decades, whether verifying 
nuclear arms reductions, combating illicit nuclear trafficking, helping States to make informed 
choices about nuclear power, or applying nuclear techniques to fight disease and starvation. 
The United States was confident that the Agency would meet those new challenges with the 
same measure of commitment that it had shown in the past and looked forward to joining in 
that effort together with other Member States. 
133. Mr. Chang-Hee KANG (Republic of Korea), having welcomed Benin as a new 
member of the Agency and commended the Director General and the Secretariat on their 
dedicated work and remarkable performance during the preceding year, said that over the past 
four decades, the Agency had made continuous endeavours to strengthen the safeguards 
system. In that context, he welcomed the adoption of the Model Additional Protocol in 1997, 
which he hoped could be brought into force at the earliest possible date. The Korean 
Government had taken measures to implement an additional protocol and had started 
consultations with the Agency regarding the subsidiary arrangements. It was currently 
revising national laws and regulations with a view to implementing all the new safeguards 
measures. 
134. He also welcomed the decision which had been taken the preceding month by the 
Conference on Disarmament in Geneva to establish an ad hoc committee to start negotiations 
on a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear weapons and other explosive 
devices. However, the recent nuclear tests which had been carried out by India and Pakistan 
ran counter to current global non-proliferation efforts and constituted a threat to regional 
stability and international peace. The Republic of Korea was gravely concerned that such 
tests might give the wrong signal to other countries aspiring to a nuclear capability, 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 28 

particularly in the context of the still unsolved nuclear issue in the DPRK. There was an 
urgent need for the international community to take concerted action to strengthen the 
effectiveness of global non-proliferation regimes. 

135. His country was deeply concerned by the continuing non-compliance of the DPRK with 
its obligations under its safeguards agreement. The Director General, in his report on that 
matter, had pointed out the continuing inability of the Agency to verify the correctness and 
completeness of the DPRK's initial declaration. He called upon the DPRK to co-operate fully 
with the Agency in preserving past information and in the monitoring of the nuclear facilities 
subject to the freeze. 
136. The Republic of Korea had already signed the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the 
Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive 
Waste Management, and it would be submitting its national report in the coming week to the 
organizational meeting of the Convention on Nuclear Safety in preparation for the peer review 
scheduled for April 1999. He urged all other States to join those efforts. 
137. Over the past decades, his country had been able to derive more benefits from the 
utilization of nuclear energy than any other Member State, thanks to the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme. It currently had 14 nuclear power plant units in operation. It had 
promoted the peaceful uses of nuclear energy under a comprehensive national policy and had 
been expanding its programmes to incorporate the development of domestic nuclear 
technologies, hi future it would be focusing its efforts on four areas. 
138. Firstly, it would continue to extend its nuclear power programme. During the current 
year, two more nuclear power plant units had been connected to the grid, one in June with a 
capacity of 700 MW(e) and the other in August with a capacity of 1000 MW(e). 
The 1000 MW(e) plant was the result of a project on nuclear power plant design 
standardization started in 1984. The new plants were safer and more reliable, and their 
operating procedures had been substantially improved through design simplifications. 
139. Secondly, the Republic of Korea would be continuing its R&D programme on the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. A 30 MW(th) research reactor had been designed and 
constructed by Korean engineers and had been in operation since 1995. The country was 
expanding its R&D activities to small and medium-sized reactors such as the system 
integrated modular advanced reactor and the 1300 MW(e) next-generation reactor. Safe 
management of radioactive waste was another major topic in the country's R&D programme. 
140. Thirdly, his country would continue to strengthen its efforts to enhance public 
understanding of nuclear energy and the Korean Government would be enhancing policy 
transparency in the implementation of nuclear programmes, including the construction and 
operation of nuclear facilities. 
141. Fourthly, Korea would continue its active involvement in the activities of the Agency's 
technical co-operation programme. Through its active participation in the RCA, Korea had 
been able to build up its R&D and industrial capabilities, including nuclear energy production 

GC(42)/OR.1 
page 29 

and the utilization of radioisotopes and radiation. With a view to sharing its experiences, 
Korea had hosted five regional courses and had held a successful international symposium on 
desalination the preceding year. During the current year, Korea would sponsor a total of eight 
training courses and workshops, in addition to an international symposium on the advanced 
light-water reactor. 

142. The Korean Government attached great importance to the amendment of Article VI of 
the Agency's Statute, which had been the subject of prolonged debate in the Board of 
Governors. Board membership should be changed without further delay in order to reflect the 
fundamental structural changes which had taken place over the past two decades in the 
international nuclear community. He sincerely hoped that a formula for the amendment of 
Article VI would be adopted during the current session. 
143. One of the major challenges of the next century would be to keep the planet safe from 
the threat of climate change and global pollution. Nuclear power could provide a major 
source of energy for future economic activities without harming the environment. Thus, the 
role of the Agency would become even more important in the future. Indeed, the Agency 
should prepare itself to fulfil new and additional mandates. In that context, he welcomed its 
decision to set up a senior expert group with an advisory function in the Office of the Director 
General. 
144. In conclusion, he said that his country was still committed to playing its part as a 
responsible member of the Agency and that it would continue to make every effort to promote 
the safe, sustainable and peaceful use of nuclear energy. 
REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS 

145. The PRESIDENT drew attention to document GC(42)/INF/11 entitled "Statement 
of Financial Contributions to the Agency as at 18 September 1998", which included a table 
indicating those Member States which had lost their voting rights by virtue of the application 
of Article XIX.A of the Statute. A communication had been received from Belarus, which 
was among those States to which that Article applied, requesting that its voting rights be 
restored (document GC(42)/INF/9). Following past practice, that request and any others 
received would be referred to the General Committee for consideration. The previous week 
the Board had recommended that the criteria or guidelines which it had endorsed in June 1998 
and submitted to the General Conference in document GC(42)/10 be applied at the current 
session. She would accordingly bring that recommendation to the attention of the General 
Committee. 
146. It was so agreed. 
The meeting rose at 1.05 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.2 

22 January 1999 
GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE SECOND PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Monday, 21 September 1998, at 3.10 p.m. 

President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
provisional Paragraphs 
agenda* 

7 General debate and annual report for 1997 (resumed) 1-104 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Ukraine 1 -12 

13-23 

Italy 

24-30 

Cuba 

31-44 

Australia 

45-55 

Morocco 
56-68 

China 
69-90 

South Africa 
91 - 105 

Argentina 

[*] GC(42)/2, Corr.1 and Add.1 -2. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 
98-03448 (XXXIX) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 



ABACC 

AFRA 

Agreed Framework 

ARCAL 

CPF 
CTBT 
CTBTO 
DPRK 
EURATOM 
KEDO 
MESA 
NAM 
NEA 
NPT 


NPT Review and 
Extension Conference 
Pelindaba Treaty 
Quadripartite 
Agreement 

TC 
TCDC 
TCF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 

UNSCOM 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 3 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 
Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Agreed Framework between the United States of America and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Country Programme Framework 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
Middle East and South Asia 
Non-Aligned Movement 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
African Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone Treaty 
Agreement between the Republic of Argentina, the Federative Republic 
of Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials and the International Atomic Energy Agency for 
the Application of Safeguards 
Technical co-operation 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
United Nations Special Commission 


GC(42)/OR.2 
page 5 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (resumed) 
(GC(42)/5) 

1. Mr. SHEVCHUK (Ukraine) observed that the period since the previous session of 
the General Conference had been a very eventful one both for Ukraine and for the Agency and 
the international community as a whole. The most significant event had been the start of the 
implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the submission by States of national 
reports on the status of nuclear safety. Furthermore, the Joint Convention on the Safety of 
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management had been 
opened for signature, as had the important Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage. Mention should also be made of the action taken to strengthen 
the non-proliferation regime through the finalization of the Model Additional Protocol 
designed to enhance the effectiveness of the safeguards system and improve the Agency's 
ability to detect the existence of undeclared material. 
2. There was therefore an extensive international legal basis for ensuring the safe use of 
nuclear energy. Of course, there was still room for improvement but, in striving for 
perfection, there should be strict respect for the sovereignty of States and the underlying 
principles of the United Nations system. In that connection, in analysing the legal basis 
governing international transports, including the transport of fissile material, the Agency 
should exercise the greatest prudence. Ukraine believed that the Agency should appoint an 
eminent group of international experts to handle that task and should report on the conclusions 
at the following session of the General Conference. 
3. On 27 March 1998, the first multi-party elections to the Ukrainian Parliament had taken 
place, but the way to liberty and democracy was a hard one under the present socio-economic 
conditions. Ukraine, which had been steadily moving towards nuclear-free status in line with 
its commitments under the NPT, had now had all the nuclear weapons inherited from the 
former Soviet Union removed from its territory. It was firmly convinced that the 
non-proliferation regime needed to be strengthened still further in order to ensure world 
security. The Ukrainian Government therefore strongly deplored the recent nuclear tests 
conducted by India and Pakistan, which ran counter to the aspirations of all countries that 
wished to see a reduction in the deployment of nuclear weapons. In that respect, the 
establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and South Asia would reduce 
the threat of military confrontation in that area. 
4. An important step towards the strengthening of the international non-proliferation 
regime would be the early signature by all countries of the CTBT in accordance with the 
wishes of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference. The international community 
was seeking to expand that regime and in that context he welcomed Benin as a new member 
of the Agency. 
5. It would be hard to overemphasize the Agency's role in the implementation of the 
non-proliferation regime, of which its safeguards system was the main instrument. Ukraine, 
which was convinced of the need to strengthen that system, had ratified its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency pursuant to the NPT on 17 December 1997 and that agreement, 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 6 

which covered all nuclear material and activities in the country, was being implemented 
successfully. Ukraine supported the new initiatives taken by the Agency in the area of NPT 
safeguards and was making preparations to sign an additional protocol to its safeguards 
agreement during the coming year. 

6. An essential step to strengthen the non-proliferation regime would be to set up an 
effective mechanism to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive 
sources. In spring 1997, the Ukrainian Cabinet of Ministers had promulgated a decree on that 
subject and a national programme had been drawn up and introduced. In view of the difficult 
economic situation facing his country, he hoped that that programme would receive 
international support. 
7. Ukraine, like the whole international community, attached high priority to nuclear and 
radiation safety, and he noted with satisfaction that those issues were occupying an 
increasingly important place in the Agency's activities. The Secretariat was playing an 
essential role in the evaluation of the safety of power plants in Central and Eastern Europe. 
An international consensus was gradually emerging with respect to the safety of Sovietdesigned 
power plants, and co-operation between East and West was developing in that area, 
as witness the existence of a whole series of projects undertaken under the auspices of the 
Agency and the European Commission. 
8. Of course, the safety problems associated with those power plants could not be solved 
overnight. Painstaking work was necessary and radical changes would have to be made in the 
legislative, economic, administrative and regulatory fields. In other words, a genuine safety 
culture had to be established at national level and that would involve a great deal of 
perseverance. The Ukrainian Parliament had recently adopted a series of laws relating to the 
protection of the population against ionizing radiation and to the ratification of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. Other draft laws were in the pipeline concerning the licensing 
of the use of nuclear energy, the physical protection of nuclear material and facilities, and 
nuclear and radiation safety regulatory bodies. Furthermore a national atomic energy 
organization had just been set up and was taking measures to improve the safety of operating 
Ukrainian power plants. 
9. The safety of Chernobyl nuclear power plant, which was a source of constant concern to 
Ukraine and to the international community, had been the subject of a Memorandum of 
Understanding signed on 20 December 1995 in Ottawa by the members of the Group of 
Seven, the Commission of the European Communities and Ukraine. Despite Ukraine's energy 
shortages, the difficult decision to shut down unit 1 of Chernobyl power plant had been taken 
and implemented in 1996. Preparations were currently being made to unload the nuclear fuel 
from its reactor. In accordance with the Memorandum of Understanding, complete shutdown 
of the Chernobyl plant would only be possible if an equivalent capacity were created at 
Khmelnitski and Rovno nuclear power plants, where the units currently under construction 
were the subject of an upgrading programme to bring them into line with Western European 
safety standards. The Ukrainian authorities attached particular importance to the project 
concerning the sarcophagus covering the fourth unit of the Chernobyl plant that had been 
destroyed in the 1986 accident. The international community was following very closely the 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 7 

work being carried out by the Ukrainian specialists, but the Government, which was 
respecting the commitments it had undertaken under the aforementioned Memorandum of 
Understanding, was concerned to note that the quest for resources had not yet been completed 
and that decisions regarding the funding of a number of projects had still not been taken. In 
July 1998, the Government had made its position clear in a statement relating to the 
implementation of the Memorandum of Understanding. 

10. The Ukrainian Government supported the measures taken by the Agency to establish a 
global civil liability regime for nuclear damage and fully supported the underlying principles. 
In July 1996, the Ukrainian Parliament had ratified the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability 
for Nuclear Damage and in 1997 measures had been taken for its implementation in Ukraine: 
in December 1997 the Parliament had adopted a law modifying the prevailing legislation and 
a group of insurance companies had been set up. 
11. The Agency's technical co-operation with Ukraine covered the main fields of utilization 
of nuclear energy. Technical assistance projects in Ukraine were proceeding smoothly and 
Ukrainian specialists were participating actively in regional technical co-operation projects. 
Taking into account the importance of nuclear power for Ukraine and with a view to 
establishing a realistic and effective programme for the development of nuclear energy, he 
wished to request that the Agency make certain adjustments to Ukraine's technical assistance 
programme for 1999-2000, with the additional costs involved to be financed in local currency. 
12. Ukraine approved the proposed budget for 1999, even if the economic difficulties that it 
was facing meant that it would not be able to pay in full its arrears in contributions. It was 
making every effort to comply with its financial obligations to the Agency, and the Ukrainian 
Government had decided to make a contribution to the TCF. He joined previous speakers in 
approving the Annual Report for 1997 and thanked the Director General and the Secretariat 
for their tireless efforts to develop international co-operation in the field of the peaceful use of 
atomic energy and to strengthen the nuclear non-proliferation regime. Ukraine would fully 
support the Agency's activities. 
13. Mr. SERRI (Italy) paid tribute to the qualities which the Director General had 
demonstrated during his first year as head of the Agency and to the way in which he had 
tackled the difficult task of revising the Agency's programmes in order to enable the Agency 
to keep pace with technical and scientific progress and to strengthen its ability to act. He also 
fully endorsed the statement made by the delegate of Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
14. The strong support given by the Italian Government to the Agency in fulfilling its 
institutional functions showed the importance which it attached to the Agency as an 
international organization playing a vital role in the battle against nuclear proliferation. In 
particular, he stressed the Agency's contribution to the economic prosperity of the developing 
countries and to the achievement of peace in the world through the verification of compliance 
with obligations under the NPT. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 8 

15. He recalled that the Italian Government, despite its budgetary restrictions, had restored 
its contribution to the TCF. That decision would undoubtedly be appreciated by the Member 
States which relied on the TCF to improve their countries' know-how, technology and 
prosperity. As a major donor, fully committed to the Agency's objectives, Italy was ready to 
assume a greater role and increased responsibilities in making human resources and 
specialized skills available to assist the Agency in carrying out its mission. 
16. As indicated in the statement made on behalf of the European Union, the Agency was 
widely regarded as a model international organization. In that context, he welcomed the 
Director General's decision to improve the Agency's programme delivery through 
implementation of an internal management action plan. As far as the reorganization of the 
Agency's programmes was concerned, he welcomed the Director General's decision to set up 
a group of senior experts from 21 Member States to examine and advise on the future 
direction of the Agency's main programmes and activities. Italy was proud that one of its 
most prominent nuclear experts had participated in that group. It was confident that that work 
would make an effective contribution to identifying the priorities of the Agency's main 
programmes and it hoped that the Medium Term Strategy referred to by the Director General 
at the September Board would take due account of the main conclusions of the expert group's 
report. 
17. There were a number of areas to which Italy attached particular importance: the new 
safeguards activities to ensure that States complied with their obligations in the field of 
nuclear non-proliferation; nuclear power plant safety; safe management of radioactive waste 
and spent fuel; decommissioning of nuclear installations; and the maximum use of spin-offs 
from nuclear energy in the framework of technical co-operation with developing countries. 
18. The Italian Government was firmly committed to the fundamental purposes for which 
the Agency had been created - the use of atomic energy for peaceful purposes - and therefore 
strongly condemned the nuclear tests recently conducted in South Asia. It had expressed on 
several occasions its concern at such actions, which ran counter to the international 
community's efforts to achieve nuclear disarmament. Those tests posed a direct threat to 
peace and the international non-proliferation regime. He therefore urged all countries which 
were not yet parties to the NPT and to the CTBT to accede to them without delay. The 
initiative taken by the international community to set up a special committee to negotiate a 
treaty banning the production of fissile material for military purposes was an encouraging step 
toward worldwide nuclear disarmament. Italy was also in favour of the establishment, within 
the Conference on Disarmament, of a consultative group to facilitate the dialogue on nuclear 
disarmament issues. It therefore urged the United States of America and Russia to speed up 
their nuclear disarmament programmes and called on China, France and the United Kingdom 
to do likewise. 
19. There was no doubt that the Agency would be entrusted with major new tasks in the 
near future. The question of the reduction of military stockpiles of fissile material and the 
new verification activities which could stem from the negotiations under way in Geneva 
would undoubtedly be on the agenda of future Agency Board meetings. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 9 

20. The Agency had an essential role to play in maximizing the benefits and minimizing the 
risks resulting from the application of nuclear technology. Misuse of nuclear technology 
could pose an unacceptable threat to mankind. Italy had therefore joined the consensus on the 
text of the additional protocols to safeguards agreements which were to be signed with the 
Agency by the non-nuclear-weapon States of the European Union. It urged countries not 
belonging to the European Union to sign similar protocols as soon as possible, in order to 
provide the Agency with the corresponding powers. He was confident that, in the discussions 
on the Agency's next two-year budget, the major programme on safeguards would receive the 
necessary support of Member States. In that context, he recalled that Italy had recently paid a 
bilateral contribution of US $2 million to KEDO for the implementation of its programmes in 
the DPRK. 
21. The international community remained concerned about the safety of old nuclear power 
plants in the former Soviet Union and the question of the safe disposal of nuclear waste. The 
Agency had the necessary authority and technical expertise to step up activities to disseminate 
a common nuclear safety culture throughout the world, and Italy welcomed the Agency's 
efforts to establish principles and rules which could be accepted by all countries using nuclear 
power for research and electricity production. His Government was making every effort to 
maintain, improve and update national know-how in the area of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection. It was therefore convinced that co-operation in international activities such as 
those carried out by the IAEA, the NEA and the European Commission, as well as bilateral 
agreements with other organizations responsible for nuclear safety, were of crucial 
importance. 
22. Turning to Italy's activities in the field of nuclear energy, he noted that in 
November 1997 the National Agency for Environmental Protection, which was also the 
national nuclear regulatory body, had organized a national conference on nuclear waste safety. 
The main objective of that conference had been to highlight the urgent need for a co-ordinated 
national policy on the safe management of spent fuel and radioactive waste, as well as on the 
decommissioning of nuclear installations. In that connection, it had been recognized that the 
main objective was to identify a national site for the disposal of all low- and intermediatelevel 
waste and for the interim storage of spent fuel and conditioned high-level waste. The 
main Italian operators, namely the Agency for New Technology, Energy and the Environment 
and the Italian National Electricity Company were currently taking steps to improve the safety 
of the management of fuel and radioactive waste. 
23. Lastly, with regard to Article VI of the Agency's Statute, Italy was convinced that any 
change in the size and composition of the Board of Governors should be carefully evaluated. 
The previous year, the countries of the European Union had endeavoured to solve the issue by 
joining the consensus on the proposal of the former Chairman of the Board, Mr. Walker. Italy 
continued to support that proposal, which it regarded as a good compromise solution. 
24. Mr. CODORNI PUJALS (Cuba), after welcoming Benin as a new member of 
the Agency, expressed his appreciation of the progress which had been made by the Agency in 
recent years in the field of technical co-operation, and in particular the efforts made by the 
Department of Technical Co-operation to improve efficiency, effectiveness and impact. The 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 10 

Agency's development, promotional and co-operation activities were of prime importance and 
should be strengthened. In a world where entire populations were suffering from hunger and 
disease, it was vital for nuclear energy to be deployed to help solve the acute problems faced 
by the great majority of countries. Experience acquired over more than 40 years, and in 
particular in recent decades, had shown that intelligent use of nuclear techniques could bring 
great benefits, whether in the breeding of more productive and resistant varieties of plants, the 
production of foodstuffs which were free of pathogens, or the improvement of diagnostic 
techniques for common illnesses. With such effective tools at its disposal for fighting some of 
the manifold problems facing humanity, the international community had a moral duty to 
make best possible use of them. 

25. Some developed countries were inclined to minimize the importance of that area and 
even reduce their contributions to the TCF. The Annual Report for 1997 showed that the 
Agency had had difficulties funding the technical co-operation programme approved by the 
Board of Governors, and the General Conference was being called upon to approve, for the 
1999-2000 biennium, figures which were far below what was required; nor had it been 
possible to come up with approximate figures for the period 2001-2002. 
26. The Agency's technical co-operation activities fell within the wider framework of 
development aid. As the globalization process continued, the world would become a more 
and more intolerable place if countries, which for historical reasons were currently more 
developed, did not demonstrate a true desire to contribute positively to the development of 
those which were less advanced. If co-operation mechanisms were weakened and 
contributions to the development of the Third World cut back, the developing countries would 
be at the mercy of blind market forces, the gap between the two camps would become 
unbridgeable, and the problems would multiply to the point of becoming insoluble. 
27. However, the situation was not hopeless and everyone had to play their part at such a 
crucial time in the history of humanity. It was the General Conference's duty to effectively 
strengthen Agency technical co-operation. That issue had been under discussion for several 
years and several resolutions had been adopted on it, but his country felt that what had been 
done to date was still insufficient. Certain measures had indeed been taken and a strategy had 
been developed which the Secretariat was now pursuing with positive results. However, no 
large-scale programme for strengthening technical co-operation comparable to that for 
safeguards had been developed. Indeed, the balance between those two essential branches of 
Agency activities seemed ever more fragile. There was an urgent need to give new impetus to 
technical co-operation through an integrated programme actively supported by all, not just in 
the form of statements, but above all with the financial support necessary to enable positive 
steps to be taken to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
28. In order to maintain the essential equilibrium between the Agency's activities, it was 
necessary to support the Secretariat's efforts to promote technical co-operation. Some of the 
measures which had been proposed - such as the setting up of regional centres of excellence were 
of particular interest and should be given support. In that context, he was pleased to note 
that an agreement had been concluded among the Governments concerned for support of the 
ARCAL programme, an important step towards strengthening that co-operation mechanism 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 11 

which was vital for the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean. The Cuban 
Government was especially pleased with that agreement as it had been finalized in La Habana 
in 1997 during the meeting of highest nuclear authorities of the member countries of ARCAL. 

29. Turning to the question of safeguards, he noted that recent events had highlighted once 
again the fragility and inconsistency of the so-called non-proliferation regime which was 
essentially discriminatory in nature. It was time to recognize the fact that the only way of 
getting rid of the nuclear threat was to eliminate nuclear weapons completely. So long as 
different standards were applied and certain countries assumed the right to threaten and 
blockade their neighbours, peace would remain illusory. It was for those reasons of principle 
that Cuba had not joined the NPT. However, the absolutely peaceful and transparent nature of 
its programme was clear, and the Cuban Government had thus notified the Secretariat that it 
wished to engage in negotiations with the Agency with a view to incorporating certain of the 
provisions of the Model Additional Protocol into the INFCIRC/66-type safeguards agreements 
it had concluded with it. Hence, Cuba's position on non-proliferation in no way impeded it 
from giving support to the Secretariat's efforts to strengthen safeguards and promote an 
atmosphere of mutual trust. 
30. The arms race, which was unfortunately closely linked to the nuclear energy issue, was 
assuming dramatic proportions in a world where food, health, education or drinking water 
needs were so desperate. If globalization was inevitable, then either the whole of humanity 
would be saved or it would all perish. It was time for those States on whom the total 
elimination of nuclear weapons depended to open their eyes to world realities, while the rest 
should do their utmost to ensure that, in the near future, the word "nuclear" became 
synonymous with well-being and progress, and not war, death and blackmail. 
31. Mr. JOSEPH (Australia), after congratulating the President and the other members 
of the General Committee on their election, and the Director General for the way in which he 
had managed the Agency over the preceding eight months, welcomed Benin which had just 
been admitted to the organization. 
32. The forty-second session of the General Conference was taking place against the 
backdrop of the nuclear tests which had been carried out in May, first by India and then 
by Pakistan. Those tests constituted a severe challenge to the basic principle of the 
non-proliferation regime, namely that world security was better served by having the fewest 
possible nuclear weapons and nuclear-weapon States. Those events had prompted major 
concern. Even as the initial shock caused by the tests subsided, the political fallout continued 
to mount. That was inevitable, and no one could ignore the damage done to half a century's 
efforts to halt the spread of the atomic bomb. It was only by ensuring that the nuclear option 
brought with it more disadvantages than advantages that other States aspiring to become 
nuclear powers could be dissuaded from following the same path. 
33. Ironically, despite all the justifications given by the two countries concerned, neither had 
gained from publicly crossing the nuclear threshold. If anything, their security had suffered, 
since a nuclear dimension had been added to their traditional bilateral tensions. Their 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 12 

international standing had also been affected: as each had discovered, considerable costs had 
attended their momentary display of nuclear prowess. 

34. What had been done could not be undone, but India and Pakistan could help mend the 
damage they had caused, and other States should look for ways of persuading them not to take 
further steps up the ladder of nuclear escalation. What needed to be done was well known. It 
had been repeated in national and regional statements, and in Security Council 
resolution 1172. Accession to the CTBT was one practical measure, and joining the NPT was 
another. Yet another would be a fissile material cut-off treaty, and the fact that India and 
Pakistan had agreed to join with others in Geneva the previous month in launching 
negotiations for such a treaty should be recognized and commended. India and Pakistan 
should also be encouraged to come to an agreement not to build the nuclear warheads they had 
tested, and not to deploy the long-range missiles they had developed. They could also agree, 
pending negotiation of a fissile material cut-off treaty and their accession to the NPT, to place 
all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards and to take steps without delay to conclude 
additional protocols to their safeguards agreements, as the General Conference had urged the 
previous year in its resolution on safeguards. Finally, both countries should be encouraged to 
abide by international norms regarding the export of sensitive nuclear technologies, as they 
had declared they would. 
35. In short, just as both countries had a choice whether or not to test, they also had the 
option to put an end to their nuclear competition and roll it back. Australia would be joining 
other States before the end of the session in tabling a draft resolution in the Plenary covering 
some of those matters. That resolution would invite the General Conference to express its 
attitude on the nuclear tests which had taken place in May, but would then go further, looking 
to the future rather than to the past, with the aim of persuading the two countries to move 
closer to the international non-proliferation mainstream. 
36. If the situation in South Asia looked partially redeemable, that was not the case in Iraq 
which, from the beginning, had shown itself to be obstructive and dissembling. On 5 August 
Iraq had declared that it was suspending its co-operation with both UNSCOM and the Agency. 
Henceforth it would permit access by their inspectors only to sites that it designated. That 
attitude, which Iraq had maintained, had seriously compromised the capacity of UNSCOM 
and the Agency's Action Team to carry out their respective mandates, preventing the Agency 
from implementing fully both its ongoing monitoring and verification role and the measures 
needed to ensure that the past programme was never reactivated. Clearly, it was time for 
steadiness of purpose in the Security Council and within the international community at large. 
The General Conference could help by giving specific support to the ongoing monitoring and 
verification efforts, and by defending the right of access required for a comprehensive and 
rigorous ongoing monitoring and verification plan. 
37. The monitoring of the freeze on the graphite-moderated reactors located at Nyongbyon 
in the DPRK was another political challenge confronting the Agency. Its responsibility in that 
area was twofold and stemmed, in the first instance, from its safeguards agreement with the 
DPRK and, in the second instance, from the role assigned to it under the Agreed Framework 
concluded between the DPRK and the United States. Australia had welcomed the Agreed 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 13 

Framework, as it had welcomed and supported the progress achieved through K.EDO in the 
preparation of the site for the intended light-water reactors, and the delivery under contract of 
heavy fuel oil supplies to the DPRK in the interim. What Australia had found most 
unwelcome was the recent attitude of the DPRK which had been constantly threatening to 
break out of the Agreed Framework. Such threats, as well as the announcement by the DPRK 
that it was ready to sell to the highest bidder missiles capable of carrying a nuclear warhead, 
and its attempt to launch a missile or place a satellite in orbit without notice or warning, with 
the rocket casings splashing down into the waters surrounding Japan, were not only 
provocative, complicating the security situation in North East Asia, but were also counterproductive 
as regards future international support for KEDO, and for humanitarian and other 
assistance to the DPRK. 

38. Moreover, the DPRK was dragging its feet in fulfilling its safeguards responsibilities. 
In fact, ever since international inspectors had first queried the DPRK's initial inventory, the 
Agency had been forced into a cat and mouse game with that country. Seven years later, the 
Agency was still being refused the kind of access which would allow it to measure the 
plutonium content of the spent fuel rods. In view of that continued obstruction, it was 
doubtful whether the Agency would ever be able to unravel the history of the DPRK's nuclear 
programme and verify whether it had fulfilled its non-proliferation obligations with respect to 
the rest of the world. 
39. However, not all the Agency's activities were so frustrating. Thus, progress continued 
to be made in the trilateral discussions involving the Agency on the one hand, and the Russian 
Federation and the United States on the other, regarding the submission of fissile material 
from the military sector to Agency verification. The decision by the United Kingdom, 
following its strategic defence review, to be the first nuclear-weapon State to declare the total 
size of its stocks of nuclear material held in both the civil and military sectors was also 
welcome. Equally, it was encouraging that the United Kingdom had now determined that 
substantial quantities of nuclear material were surplus to its defence programme and could 
therefore be placed under Agency safeguards. 
40. One enduring problem in handling all that surplus material was how to immobilize it 
prior to any eventual geological disposal. Australia happened to be at the cutting edge of 
technological development in that field and was particularly pleased that a synthetic 
rock-based ceramic waste form, developed by the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology 
Organization in collaboration with some United States organizations, had recently been 
chosen by the United States Department of Energy to help dispose of surplus weapons 
plutonium in that country. 
41. In addition to those encouraging developments in the nuclear-weapon States, it was 
gratifying to note that a decision had finally been taken the previous month at the Conference 
on Disarmament to commence negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty, which had long 
been a major foreign policy objective of Australia which now looked forward to engaging 
with others in what would undoubtedly be complex but, hopefully, also productive 
negotiations. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 14 

42. The Agency was also being confronted with institutional problems which merited some 
attention. In the safeguards field, the process which had started with the adoption of the 
Model Additional Protocol the previous year was continuing to move forward. Until the entry 
into force of Jordan's additional protocol in July 1998, Australia had been the only Member 
State with an additional protocol in force. It welcomed the fact that other States had already 
signed such protocols, and that others had expressed the intention of doing so shortly. Indeed, 
Australia wished very much to see universal adherence to the new protocol, and then swift 
integration of the new system with the old one. Classical safeguards would then give way to 
strengthened safeguards with implications across the Agency and beyond. Specifically, while 
the additional protocol might not yet be in effect in a sufficient number of States to establish it 
clearly as part of the Agency's safeguards system under the terms of Article III of the NPT, 
that moment would come, and the parties to the NPT would then need to address the 
implications for those States parties which had not accepted the strengthened safeguards 
system. Substitution of the strengthened safeguards system for classical safeguards would 
need to be addressed in terms of the definition of "full-scope safeguards" employed in the 
Nuclear Suppliers Group and elsewhere. 
43. For some years, the Agency had been obliged to function on the basis of zero real 
growth. That had been a useful discipline, making the Agency a more cost-efficient 
organization. Nevertheless, zero real growth had been imposed at a time of escalating 
demands on the Agency which the Director General had spelt out at the previous meeting. 
The Agency had worked hard to achieve savings, as the Director General had mentioned but, 
as he had also said, the point had now arrived where further cuts would hamper programme 
implementation. He had therefore asked whether governments were prepared to provide the 
Agency with the financial resources which they said they wanted it to have, or whether the 
Agency's programme was to be solely dictated by its budget. In the latter case, the Director 
General would fix priorities which would have to conform to a predefined financial ceiling. 
He had gone even further in his comments, answering in a sense the question he had posed. 
He had not only called attention to the new important responsibilities that the Agency was 
having to, or would have to assume, as a result, inter alia, of extending safeguards to material 
covered by a possible fissile material cut-off treaty, but had also floated the idea of a special 
fund for arms control verification and security of nuclear material. Australia was prepared to 
give further consideration to that proposal, though of course it was not prepared to commit 
itself at such an early stage. Nevertheless, it was keeping an open mind, at least pending 
further developments in what would no doubt be hard fought negotiations in Geneva. 
44. Finally, his country supported the nuclear safety strategy review on which the Agency 
had embarked. In particular, it hoped that the Agency would take a stronger, more active role 
in regional efforts to enhance nuclear safety, especially in the Asia and Pacific region which 
perhaps had the greatest potential for expansion of nuclear power generation in coming years. 
The Agency could, for example, play a more prominent role in the conferences on nuclear 
safety in Asia. To date, there had been two such conferences which the Agency had attended 
as an observer. Australia was of the opinion that it would be appropriate and highly beneficial 
for the Agency to play a more active facilitating role in the next conference in that series. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 15 

45. Mr. TAHIRI (Morocco) welcomed Benin's admission to the Agency and 
expressed the hope that the General Conference would adopt a resolution similar to that 
adopted by the United Nations General Assembly at its last session in order to raise the level 
of participation of Palestine in the Agency's work. 
46. Morocco had always been in favour of the total elimination of weapons of mass 
destruction, as demonstrated by its accession to the NPT, its signing of the CTBT and the 
Pelindaba Treaty, and by its conclusion with the Agency of a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement. In that connection, he reiterated that Morocco was ready to engage in early 
consultations with the Agency with a view to concluding an additional protocol to its 
comprehensive safeguards agreement in the hope that the countries in the region would follow 
suit so as to promote the universality of the NPT and provide assurances to non-nuclearweapon 
States against any nuclear threat. Morocco could only deplore the recent nuclear tests 
and express its full support for the Final Act adopted at the end of the NAM Summit held in 
Durban at the beginning of the month. 
47. Morocco was in favour of the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free zones in all regions 
of the world, particularly in the Middle East. It therefore called on the countries in that region 
to join in the efforts to establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East and recalled 
that Israel was the only country not to have signed the NPT and not to have placed its nuclear 
facilities under Agency safeguards, thereby representing a danger for neighbouring countries 
and a threat to international peace and security. Member States should, therefore, in 
accordance with the Agency's Statute, stop helping Israel to strengthen its arsenal and cease 
applying double standards by tolerating exceptions to the rule of international law. 
48. Morocco reaffirmed its readiness to co-operate with the Agency and Member States in 
combating illicit trafficking in nuclear material and other radioactive sources, which posed a 
serious threat to world peace and security. It was also mindful of the problems posed, 
particularly for developing countries, by the transport of nuclear waste and by radioactive 
leakages. Morocco was particularly concerned at the fact that the Strait of Gibraltar was used 
as a passage for the transport of radioactive material. It therefore supported the draft 
resolution on the rationalization and control of such transports. 
49. The strengthening of technical co-operation activities in the nuclear field to promote 
peace and development was one of the Agency's main objectives, and Morocco reiterated its 
support for the new approach consisting of elaborating medium-term country programmes for 
the use of nuclear technologies for development and drawing up Model Projects with an 
economic and social impact, taking national development priorities into account. 
50. The Agency should develop a communication strategy and establish, in the light of the 
resolutions of the last Tokyo summit on climate change, its own "Agenda 21" to demonstrate 
how it could help to solve certain problems associated with development and the environment, 
with particular emphasis on the protection of the ozone layer and the reduction of greenhouse 
gas emissions. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 16 

51. Morocco encouraged the Agency to give special attention to medium-sized nuclear 
power plants in view of the contribution which they could make to energy self-sufficiency 
and, hence, to sustainable development. It therefore looked forward to the Medium Term 
Strategy due to be prepared by the Director General and hoped that the most developed 
Member States would contribute to its implementation by providing the necessary human and 
financial resources. It was indeed regrettable that, whereas developing countries were 
increasingly in need of projects with economic and social impact, the financial resources 
allocated for that purpose by the Agency were diminishing. 
52. There was a need to review existing international legal instruments in order to take 
account of technological developments and to respond better to the urgent needs of 
populations with respect to development; to use nuclear power for economic and social 
purposes and increasingly less for military purposes; and to strengthen satellite control and 
monitoring mechanisms in the nuclear field. 
53. Within the framework of its efforts to strengthen its scientific and technical 
infrastructure in the nuclear field, Morocco had, inter alia, set up the National Radiation 
Protection Centre as well as a nuclear research centre and a food irradiation unit. In addition, 
it had carried out studies and research with a view to establishing a pilot nuclear desalination 
plant. It should also be noted that Morocco had taken steps to establish the necessary 
legislative framework in the nuclear field based on the international instruments that had been 
adopted in that area. 
54. The pursuit of "atoms for peace" could help to remove two formidable obstacles to 
development: water shortage and energy shortage. Water was an increasingly important 
commodity for many countries, particularly in the Middle East and North Africa, where 
demand was ever increasing as a result of population growth and industrial and agricultural 
development. It was therefore essential to develop joint strategies to deal with such shortages, 
the more especially as national development and stability and regional and world security 
were at stake. The Agency possessed considerable technical and human resources which 
could be mobilized systematically to solve that increasingly acute problem. In the field of 
nuclear desalination techniques and techniques for determining the origin of leaks in dams, 
the Agency had supported several Model Projects, including two in Morocco, which could be 
reproduced in other areas of the world, particularly in Africa and in the Arab world. 
55. The effectiveness of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime depended both 
on the effectiveness and fairness with which the safeguards system was applied and on there 
being effective and democratic participation in decision-making within the Agency. It was 
therefore appropriate to mention two interdependent problems, namely the democratization of 
the Board of Governors and the loss of voting rights by several countries. In that connection, 
Morocco reiterated its support for the Africa Group concerning the number of additional seats 
and its support for the Arab position concerning the composition of the MESA Group, and 
paid tribute to Japan for the proposal it had made to try and solve that problem. The countries 
concerned should therefore redouble their efforts and find the necessary political will to solve 
that problem once and for all. With regard to the loss of voting rights, which affected a third 
of the members of the Agency - for the most part developing countries - that was a problem 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 17 

which could jeopardize the universality of policy-making in the Agency and the credibility of 
the decisions taken, particularly those relating to peace and security. 

56. Mr. ZHANG HUAZHU (China), having welcomed Benin, expressed satisfaction 
at the progress made by the Agency in formulating international legal instruments which 
would undoubtedly have far-reaching positive effects on international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy by promoting nuclear safety and preventing the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. 
57. Among the many activities carried out during the past year to improve nuclear safety 
and radioactive waste management, he drew particular attention to the Model Projects 
designed to strengthen radiation safety infrastructures in developing countries, in which more 
than 50 countries had participated. He also noted the considerable progress made by the 
Agency in promoting the application of nuclear techniques in the areas of agriculture, 
industry, human health, water resources and environmental protection. 
58. Since joining the Agency in 1984, China had always maintained a good co-operative 
relationship with the organization. It provided support for and participated actively in both 
the Agency's promotional activities and its safeguards activities. As a nuclear-weapon State, 
China had always been in favour of the complete banning and total destruction of nuclear 
weapons. In addition to supporting the indefinite extension of the NPT and signing the 
CTBT, China had also taken an active part in the negotiations on the Model Additional 
Protocol to strengthen the safeguards system and had helped to strengthen the effectiveness 
and improve the efficiency of the system by adopting measures in accordance with its 
obligations under Article I of the NPT. China was currently conducting negotiations with the 
Agency with a view to concluding an additional protocol to its safeguards agreement. 
59. In order to strengthen the control of nuclear exports, China had joined the Zangger 
Committee in October 1997 and had promulgated two regulations subjecting nuclear exports 
and exports of nuclear-related dual-use items to legal control, which had helped considerably 
to promote co-operation and trade between China and other countries. 
60. In order to meet electricity demand, China had constructed two nuclear power plants in 
the 1990s with a total installed capacity of 2100 MW, which were operating satisfactorily. 
During the ninth five-year plan it intended to construct four other plants with a total of eight 
units and a total installed capacity of 6600 MW, marking a new phase in the development of 
nuclear power. 
61. China attached great importance to the safety of nuclear power and had promulgated 
nearly 90 laws, regulations and codes, which constituted a reliable multi-level safety 
management system. It also intended to fulfil its obligations under the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety. Having set up the implementation mechanism and prepared its national report, China 
was ready to take an active part in the organizational meeting of Contracting Parties to the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety planned for the following week and in the review meeting 
which would take place in 1999. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 18 

62. China had always maintained that the safety of nuclear facilities, and particularly major 
ones such as nuclear power plants was of crucial importance. It therefore believed that the 
Agency, as an intergovernmental organization, should place greater emphasis not only on 
nuclear safety management, but also on nuclear safety services by providing appropriate 
assistance to meet the various needs of its Member States. Strengthening nuclear safety was a 
prerequisite for the development of nuclear power in various countries and for international 
co-operation in the field of the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. 
63. Since its establishment, the Agency had played an important role in promoting 
international co-operation in the field of the peaceful use of atomic energy and in 
preventing the proliferation of nuclear weapons, but it now had to face new challenges. The 
nuclear tests carried out by India and then by Pakistan had been universally condemned by 
the international community. Those tests had been a serious blow to international 
non-proliferation efforts and posed a threat to the international nuclear non-proliferation 
regime, of which the NPT was the cornerstone. They had aggravated the nuclear arms race in 
South Asia and seriously undermined peace and stability in the region. His Government was 
very concerned at the situation and called on India and Pakistan to implement United Nations 
Security Council resolution 1172 in full, to abandon their nuclear-weapons programme and to 
accede immediately and unconditionally to the CTBT and to the NPT. At the same time, the 
international community should take additional measures to strengthen the global nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to bolster the 
authority and universality of the NPT. The Agency should play an active role in that regard. 
64. The balance between promotional activities and safeguards remained a subject of deep 
concern to Member States, particularly developing countries. His Government believed that 
those two types of activities should interact and complement each other. However essential 
safeguards might be, the legitimate rights and interests of Member States in the peaceful uses 
of nuclear energy should not be disregarded nor the development of the nuclear industry or 
international co-operation and trade hampered in the quest to prevent the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons. 
65. He noted with regret that the technical co-operation programme approved for 1997 had 
had to be reduced owing to a shortage of funds. That could only reinforce doubts about the 
reliability of technical co-operation resources. Since the TCF was financed from voluntary 
contributions, all Member States, in particular the developed countries, should honour their 
obligations by paying their contributions in full and on time. One of the main reasons for the 
imbalance between the two types of activity was indisputably the lack of technical 
co-operation funds due to the unpredictable nature of voluntary contributions. His 
Government was concerned to see that that situation was getting worse and urged that an 
immediate solution be found. 
66. His delegation had always believed that the Agency's technical co-operation activities 
played a vital role in promoting the development and application of nuclear technology in 
developing countries and felt that the Agency should seek to strengthen its co-operation with 
those countries, ascertain their needs and formulate co-operation programmes adapted to the 
specific conditions and development objectives of those countries. Furthermore, the Agency 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 19 

should explore ways of promoting co-operation among developing countries themselves and 
between developed and developing countries, so as to foster the self-sufficiency of developing 
countries and establish a new form of international relations. 

67. Since the present Chinese Government had taken up office, government institutions had 
undergone structural reforms. The China Atomic Energy Authority continued however to 
formulate the national development strategy for the nuclear industry, to prepare development 
plans and to promote research, development and the application of atomic energy. The China 
Atomic Energy Authority was also concerned with co-operation and international exchanges 
in the nuclear field and matters related to the Agency, with which China intended to continue 
its close co-operation. 
68. On the eve of the twenty-first century, the world was full of new challenges, as well as 
opportunities and hopes. China was convinced that the Agency would be able to discharge its 
heavy responsibilities with dynamism and optimism as long as Member States strengthened 
their co-operation, treated each other on an equal footing, tackled the major issues in a 
judicious and reasonable manner and respected the objectives and principles enshrined in the 
Agency's Statute. 
69. Mr. MADUNA (South Africa), after welcoming Benin as the 129th member of the 
Agency, noted that the past year had been a period of consolidation and review. The new 
Director General had taken pains to examine every aspect of the Agency's activities with a 
view to enhancing efficiency and cost-effectiveness. South Africa looked forward with 
interest to the report of the panel of experts which would be completed soon and to the 
Medium Term Strategy which the Director General had promised to prepare on the basis of 
that panel's recommendations. It also welcomed the new thematic approach at the General 
Conference and the creation of a scientific forum. 
70. Speaking as a representative of an African country, he wished to emphasize the role 
which the Agency should play and to a certain extent was already playing in developing 
countries and Africa in particular. As was well known, Africa was in danger of being 
increasingly marginalized in an era of globalization: many African countries faced the 
greatest economic and social development problems anywhere in the world. In its own 
sphere, the Agency could contribute in a real and tangible way to sustainable development, 
and his delegation urged the Director General and the Agency to examine how that impact 
could be maximized. The emphasis placed by the Department of Technical Co-operation on 
Model Projects, on regional co-operation, inter alia through its material support for AFRA, 
and on promoting the transfer of technology through TCDC was a clearly positive approach, 
and the Agency could be proud of its achievements so far. 
71. Much more still needed to be done, but that raised the question of available resources. 
The TCF had seen impressive growth over the past decade, and the fact that all the major 
donors were now contributing or would soon contribute to the Fund was welcome news. 
However, the Fund appeared to have levelled off recently, which, at a time of growing 
demand, especially in Africa, could undermine the Agency's crucial work in the field of 
technical co-operation. South Africa was pleased to announce that it had paid its full share of 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 20 

the target for 1998 and would contribute $263 530 in 1999, which was again 100% of its 
share. 

72. South Africa was glad to be able to participate in the Agency's projects in the region of 
Africa, including those it was financing under AFRA. Where the vital area of co-operation in 
training was concerned, South African institutions had received 32 fellows during the year, 
mainly from the region of Africa, and a further 20 applications for training at various nuclear 
institutions in South Africa were currently being processed. Over and above the Agency's 
fellowship programme, a further 140 persons from the region of Africa had also received 
training in South Africa through various training initiatives supported by the Agency. 
73. With regard to the TC Model Projects in which South Africa was participating, all were 
progressing well and feedback from the Agency was very positive. The projects involved the 
eradication of fruit flies in the Western Cape Province using the sterile insect technique, the 
establishment of a regional centre for radiological protection, and water resource management 
using isotope hydrology. 
74. The AFRA projects continued to contribute usefully to resolving the continent's 
problems, for example in the areas of strengthening regional waste management 
infrastructures, harmonizing radiation protection practices and improving clinical 
radiotherapy. In that connection, South Africa had offered the AFRA Chairperson the 
services of an assistant who would work on the AFRA Field Management Committee. 
75. As to country programme frameworks, a team of local experts assisted by Agency 
officials had met in South Africa in August to draft a CPF for the purpose of strengthening the 
links between South Africa and the Agency's Department of Technical Co-operation. The 
preparation of a CPF for South Africa was proceeding remarkably well, given the country's 
large and diverse industry. The assistance provided by the two IAEA experts had played a 
crucial role in the success of the first part of the process. 
76. Turning to the nuclear activities pursued in South Africa in the course of the past year, 
he said that his country had continued to establish itself as a recognized international supplier 
of medical and industrial isotopes. The bulk of those isotopes was produced by the Atomic 
Energy Corporation's SAFARI reactor, but a small quantity of special medical isotopes was 
also produced at the National Accelerator Centre near Cape Town. That programme was a 
good example of how weapons-grade highly enriched uranium from a dismantled nuclear 
weapons programme could be utilized fully for peaceful purposes. 
77. The practical application of radiation-based technology to meet the needs of industry 
had gained further impetus from the Atomic Energy Corporation's development of an 
industrial coal ash monitor that measured the ash content of coal directly and continuously on 
a moving conveyor belt. That technology was now widely used by the coal mining industry in 
South Africa. The Atomic Energy Corporation had also designed a unique portable 
instrument which enabled the coal dust concentration to be measured directly in a coal mine in 
order to prevent coal dust explosions, which should lead to safer coal mining throughout the 
world. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 21 

78. The national radioactive waste disposal facility at Vaalputs (about 600 km north of Cape 
Town) had continued to receive low- and intermediate-level waste from the nuclear power 
plant near Cape Town. He was pleased to report that after some cracks had been discovered 
in the concrete containers for the intermediate-level waste, an IAEA expert team had 
investigated the situation and confirmed that no radioactive contamination could be found 
beyond the immediate confines of the affected concrete drums within the trench and that the 
situation was well in hand. 
79. Still on the subject of nuclear power, he noted that Eskom, the national electricity utility, 
had been doing impressive work on a 100 MW(e) pebble-bed modular reactor for application 
in small power stations. That project had arisen from the integrated electricity planning 
process, which focused on the long-term electricity needs of southern Africa. International 
technical and economic feasibility studies had shown that the project held exciting 
possibilities, in particular for developing countries, which would now be able to contemplate 
acquiring small nuclear power stations of their own at a time when the traditional sources of 
power were coming under ever greater environmental pressures. In view of the safeness of the 
reactor, its positive aspects for the application of safeguards on its nuclear fuel, and its 
environment-friendly nature, the project could only be encouraged. 
80. With regard to non-proliferation and the strengthening of the safeguards system, he 
noted that a fair number of additional protocols - some with countries having substantial 
nuclear industries - had already been approved by the Board and consultations had been 
started with many others, including South Africa. His country firmly supported the 
strengthening of safeguards, including the additional protocol, which it intended to sign and 
ratify once the current wide-ranging reviews of programmes and legislation had been 
completed. Just as the Agency was undergoing a thorough review of all its activities, South 
Africa was reviewing all its energy-related legislation and activities. 
81. The situation was less encouraging where the formal entry into force was concerned for 
obvious reasons such as the changes in national legislation that needed to be effected. 
However, his delegation believed that another important problem might be uncertainty about 
the practical aspects of implementing the protocol, in other words, the so-called "integration 
of current and new measures". The IAEA and its Member States would have to make a 
transition from a situation of restricted information and access (albeit compensated by very 
accurate materials accounting) to a situation of total nuclear transparency, which amongst 
other things would involve substantially more information and wider access. It was a difficult 
transition from a culture of "nuclear secrecy" with a highly quantitative implementation 
approach to a culture of openness where the only restriction would be the need to protect 
confidential commercial information. It was incumbent upon Member States to make that 
transition consciously, but also upon the Secretariat to be open and clear on how safeguards 
conclusions would be formulated in future on the basis of more qualitative judgements and 
more use of random access and verifications while taking into account the very different fuel 
cycle activities of Member States. 
82. Member States might expect that the new way of applying safeguards would continue to 
be based on rigid models designed to ensure non-discriminatory application, but that might 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 22 

not be possible. In his delegation's view, the mechanistic approach used earlier to achieve 
that was no longer viable and differentiation would have to be accepted. That new fact of life 
would be accepted much more easily if the Secretariat could demonstrate not only greater 
effectiveness, which was more of international interest, but also greater efficiency, which was 
of direct benefit to Member States. 

83. The first report on nuclear safety in South Africa required under the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety had been compiled and submitted to the Agency. His country looked forward 
to the first international peer review meeting on country reports, which would be a major 
contribution to ensuring that adequate and harmonized standards of nuclear safety were 
maintained throughout the world. 
84. South Africa was still considering signing the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent 
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. Efforts were also 
continuing to develop a national policy on radioactive waste management. 
85. Regarding the transport of radioactive materials, South Africa endorsed the IAEA safety 
standards. Consignors of spent fuel, plutonium and high-level wastes by sea were encouraged 
to maintain contact with coastal States and to provide timely information on the passage of 
shipments in the proximity of their coasts. 
86. The Council for Nuclear Safety was collaborating with various bodies in South Africa 
with a view to establishing a regional radiation emergency response capability that would, 
through the AFRA organization, ensure an adequate response to radiation accidents and 
emergencies anywhere within the African region. 
87. Turning to Article VI of the Statute, he said he regretted deeply that it had not been 
possible to solve the problem of expansion of the Board of Governors. Quite recently the 
Board had been close to reaching agreement on what had been described as a "small" increase 
in the number of Board members, which would surely have benefited Africa since the General 
Conference had always maintained that that continent (and of course the MESA Group) was 
under-represented. His delegation had therefore been more than surprised when the idea of 
linkage had surfaced which it felt was unreasonable and unfair to the Africa Group. 
88. On the subject of disarmament, he said that South Africa deplored the nuclear tests 
conducted recently in South Asia and repeated its call to the States concerned to accede to 
the CTBT. At the same time it appealed to the nuclear-weapon States to redouble their efforts 
to achieve complete global nuclear disarmament. His delegation was heartened at the 
prospect of quantifiable progress in international nuclear disarmament arising from the 
trilateral initiative between the Agency, the Russian Federation and the United States of 
America. It encouraged the parties involved to pursue their discussions and activities 
vigorously. That initiative did, however, raise crucial questions over and above the technical 
and legal challenges it posed. One such was the institutional implications of involvement for 
the IAEA and the possible cost to the organization. At a time when some delegations were 
insisting on zero real or even nominal growth and resources were increasingly scarce, the 
Agency would be severely challenged in trying to meet the crucial obligations which might 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 23 

fall upon it. His delegation had always maintained that if an activity was important enough, 
the resources necessary had to be found. That was true of technical co-operation, and it was 
also true of strengthened safeguards and nuclear disarmament verification. 

89. Finally, he urged all African countries and others concerned to sign and ratify the 
Pelindaba Treaty for an African nuclear-weapon-free zone. Such ratification would enable the 
African Commission on Nuclear Energy (ASCONE) to be established. 
90. In conclusion, he expressed his belief that the IAEA was a basically sound organization 
which would be able to meet future challenges under the dynamic leadership of the Director 
General. 
91. Mr. KRECKLER (Argentina), having noted with satisfaction that a representative 
of Latin America was President of the session, said that Argentina would continue to 
participate constructively in the work of the Agency, whose role in promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy it considered essential. 
92. The key elements of Argentine policy in the area of non-proliferation were the 
agreement with Brazil for the exclusively peaceful use of nuclear energy, the Quadripartite 
Safeguards Agreement concluded with the Agency, the Tlatelolco Treaty and the NPT. 
Co-ordination and co-operation between Argentina and Brazil in the area of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy were of particular importance, and Argentina wished to 
congratulate Brazil which had just ratified the NPT, and to recall its own commitment to the 
international safeguards regime implemented by the Agency, particularly as that regime had 
been hard hit by the recent nuclear tests. 
93. Since one of the main aspects of the Agency's activities was precisely safeguards, he 
drew attention to the activities undertaken by the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for 
Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials (ABACC) that had been located in 
Rio de Janeiro since 1992 and played an important role with regard to the transparency of the 
nuclear programmes of the two countries and the implementation of the Quadripartite 
Agreement concluded with the Agency. ABACC and the Agency were co-operating 
increasingly closely, in no small measure due to the good offices of the Director General, and 
they had recently concluded a technical co-operation agreement. Argentina and Brazil were 
entirely satisfied with the work of ABACC and were willing to share the experience acquired 
in that connection with other countries. 
94. The promotion of co-operation in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was 
another equally essential aspect of the Agency's activities. In that regard, it was noteworthy 
that a draft text had recently been arrived at for a technical co-operation agreement for the 
promotion of nuclear science and technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, which 
would constitute the institutional framework of the ARCAL programme. He was confident 
that, with the benefit of the Agency's experience, that intergovernmental agreement would 
serve to promote multilateral co-operation between the countries of the region and help avoid 
any duplication of effort; Argentina intended to sign the agreement as soon as possible. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 24 

95. In support of the Secretariat's efforts to streamline the work of the General Conference, 
he would only speak on certain items of the agenda - other items could be discussed in the 
Committee of the Whole. With regard to the composition of the Board of Governors, his 
delegation appreciated the efforts of the Chairman of the Board, the Resident Representative 
of Japan. It was essential that the solution finally adopted ensured equitable representation for 
all regions. 
96. The transport of radioactive materials was a subject of concern in Latin America, and 
Argentina was pressing for improvement of the regulations on that subject. The Agency had a 
key role to play in that regard. At the national level, Argentina was complying scrupulously 
with the provisions of the Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Materials. 
97. While the Joint Consultative Group on IAEA/CTBTO Co-operation had concluded its 
work, Argentina still felt that there was ample scope for co-operation and exchange of 
experience between the Agency and the Preparatory Commission of the Comprehensive 
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. 
98. Turning to the study of the radiological situation at the Mururoa and Fangataufa Atolls, 
he said that, in addition to its political significance, that operation was of great technical value 
and would enable the international scientific community to better understand the phenomena 
involved when evaluating the radiological situation at other sites where nuclear tests had been 
carried out. 
99. With regard to the recent nuclear tests, which posed a threat to international security and 
the international non-proliferation regime, he said that the Agency clearly had a key role to 
play. Argentina hoped that all countries would accede to the CTBT and called upon all States, 
whether or not parties to the Treaty, to cease tests. It supported the Secretariat's efforts to 
perform the tasks assigned to it by United Nations Security Council resolutions and to apply 
safeguards agreements, and hoped in that connection that Iraq would comply with its 
obligations and resume co-operation with the Agency. 
100. Turning to Argentina's achievements over the previous year, he said that the principal 
event was the commissioning of the RA-8 critical assembly, which would be used to adjust 
the design parameters for the Argentine CAREM low-power reactor (25 MW(e)), specifically 
intended to supply electricity in isolated regions, and possibly to be coupled to a seawater 
desalination system, as indicated in document GC(42)/l/Rev.1. The second notable 
achievement was the completion and commissioning of the 22 MW(e) multi-purpose reactor 
and related facilities being supplied to Egypt. 
101. The sale of heavy water to Germany and the Republic of Korea by the ENSI Company, 
which had also supplied heavy water to Canada to replace what it had borrowed for the 
Embalse nuclear power plant, attested to the vitality of the Argentine nuclear sector. 
Furthermore, the two Argentine nuclear power plants were operating smoothly using fuel and 
heavy water produced in the country. The availability factor of the two plants had risen from 
90.9% in 1997 to 95.7% during the first half of 1998, and their production accounted for 
11.5% and 12.08% respectively of the gross output of the Argentine power system. 

GC(42)/OR.2 
page 25 

102. Within the framework of the law on nuclear activities enacted in August 1997, 
regulating nuclear matters in Argentina and specifying the functions of the Nuclear Regulatory 
Authority and the National Atomic Energy Commission, work had commenced on a strategic 
plan establishing the institutional priorities for the years to come. 
103. In December 1997, Argentina had signed the three instruments negotiated that year 
under the auspices of the Agency, namely the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel 
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, the Protocol to Amend the 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, and the Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, which should all help promote the future 
development of nuclear activities. Argentina had thereby underlined its support for the 
Agency's efforts to regulate various complex aspects of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
104. Finally, the Nuclear Regulatory Authority, an independent body responsible for 
radiation protection, nuclear safety, safeguards and physical protection, was continuing to 
develop its activities in a satisfactory manner; it was taking an active role at the international 
level and was co-operating with the Agency, particularly in the areas of radiation protection 
and safeguards. In May 1998, the second forum of Latin American regulatory bodies had 
been held in Argentina under the auspices of the Nuclear Regulatory Authority and had dealt, 
inter alia, with the safety of radiation sources. 
105. Argentina remained committed to strengthening co-operation in the nuclear field at both 
the multilateral and bilateral levels. At the bilateral level, it had close relations both with 
countries from which it could profitably receive know-how and technology and with those to 
which it could transfer its own technology. In making such transfers, Argentina adhered to the 
requirements laid down by the Nuclear Suppliers Group and the Zangger Committee. 
Furthermore, it was continuing to participate in the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme as well as the ARCAL programme by hosting courses, workshops and scientific 
meetings, training Agency fellows, receiving scientists from abroad, and also by making its 
experts and lecturers available to the Agency. Congratulating the Secretariat on the success of 
the programmes it had implemented, he said that, as in previous years, Argentina would 
contribute to the TCF to the extent of its means. Lastly, on the bilateral plane, he recorded the 
entry into force of co-operation agreements with the Republic of Korea, Costa Rica, the 
United States of America, EURATOM, Morocco and Thailand, the signing of an agreement 
with Armenia, the adoption of modalities of execution of existing agreements with the 
United States of America and the Russian Federation, and also the stepping up of technical 
co-operation with Brazil. 
The meeting rose at 5.20 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.3 
6 November 1998 

International Atomic Energy Agency GENERAL Distr. 

GENERAL CONFERENCE 

Original: ENGLISH 

FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE THIRD PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Tuesday, 22 September 1998, at 10.30 a.m. 


President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 
Later: Mr. FRSTER (Netherlands) 
Mr. ZAIDE (Philippines) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and Annual Report for 1997 (continued) 1-56 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Russian Federation 1-11 
Bangladesh 12-17 
Croatia 18-23 
Romania 24-33 
India 34-46 
Egypt 47-56 

5 Arrangements for the Conference 57-81 

(a) Adoption of the agenda and allocation of items for initial 
57-79 

discussion 

(b) Closing date of the session and opening date of the next session 80-81 
Requests for the restoration of voting rights 82-87 

7 General debate and Annual Report for 1997 (resumed) 88 - 104 

Statements by the delegates of: 
Islamic Republic of Iran 88-94 
Sudan 95-104 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 

98-03454 (XXXVIII) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their ovra copies of documents to meetings. 



AFRA 

Assistance 

Convention 

BWR 

CTBT 

CTBTO 

Early 
Notification 

Convention 

EURATOM 
FBR 
IRRT 
ITER 

Joint Convention 

LDC 
LWR 
MESA 
MOX 
NAM 
NPT 

NPT Review and 

Extension Conference 
Nuclear Safety 
Convention 

NWFZ 
PHWR 
PTA 

PTBT 

R&D 
RBMK 
TCDC 
TCF 
UNSCOM 
WWER 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 3 

Abbreviations used in this record 

African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 

and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency 

Boiling water reactor 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 

Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 

European Atomic Energy Community 
Fast breeder reactor 
International Regulatory Review Team 
International Thermonuclear Experimental Reactor 

Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the 

Safety of Radioactive Waste Management 
Least developed country 
Light-water reactor 
Middle East and South Asia 
Mixed oxide 
Non-Aligned Movement 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferationof Nuclear Weapons 

Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferationof Nuclear Weapons 
Convention on Nuclear Safety 

Nuclear-weapon-free zone 
Pressurized heavy water reactor 
Preferential Trade Area 

Partial Test Ban Treaty (Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the 

Atmosphere, in Outer Space and Under Water) 
Research and development 
High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
United Nations Special Commission 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor (former USSR) 


GC(42)/OR.3 
page 4 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (continued) 
(GC(42)/5) 

1. Mr. ADAMOV (Russian Federation) said that in the twenty-first century, he 
would like to see the Agency continue to be an international organization highly competent in 
the nuclear area, furthering the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy to meet the 
needs of the international community, and continuing its verification activities - a key element 
of the non-proliferation regime. The concerns expressed by environmental protection 
movements were understandable - despite the efforts made, nuclear power still did not meet 
the requirements identified by Enrico Fermi at the very outset of its development, namely 
economy, reactor safety, safe radioactive waste management, and non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons; yet there was no alternative if mankind's increasing energy needs were to be met. 
2. Research carried out in Russia had shown that it was possible to go some way towards 
satisfying those requirements, by developing a safe nuclear fuel cycle comprising inherently 
safe nuclear power plants and installations that manufactured fuel without plutonium 
extraction - an important aspect from the non-proliferation point of view. The burning of 
plutonium had been envisaged as part of that fuel cycle, as well as the transmutation of longlived 
radioactive elements, leading to the return to the earth of a small quantity of 
radioactivity comparable to the amount extracted in the mining of uranium. Such a fuel cycle 
would be environmentally safe and at the same time would offer a final solution to the 
problem of radioactive waste. Russia was prepared to provide details of that technology 
during the round-table discussions on nuclear power development prospects to be held the 
following day. 
3. Ideas of that sort could only be implemented at the international level, however, since 
industrial companies which had not yet made returns on their investments into conventional 
nuclear technology were not interested in investing in the development of new reactor 
technologies and related fuel cycles. The Agency, on the other hand, could play an important 
role in furthering co-operation on such matters, as had been shown convincingly by the ITER 
project, which had provided a framework for the resolution of complex problems of a legal, 
political, environmental and economic nature. The Agency's successfully completed 
extrabudgetary programme on WWER and RBMK plant safety was also a good example of 
co-operation to solve technical issues of great importance to nuclear power as a whole. 
4. One of the most serious problems associated with nuclear power was what to do with 
fissile materials no longer required for defence purposes. While suitable technologies for 
uranium now existed, no final disposal option had been chosen with regard to plutonium. His 
country believed that nuclear material removed from nuclear weapons should be used 
primarily in nuclear power, and the intergovernmental agreement between Russia and the 
United States of America on scientific and technical co-operation in the management of 
plutonium from nuclear military programmes was an important step in that regard. 
5. At the recent summit meeting in Moscow, the Presidents of Russia and the United States 
had confirmed their commitment to nuclear disarmament and co-operation in the field of 
weapons-origin nuclear material utilization. They had outlined a number of specific measures 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 5 

for the development of environmentally safe and cost-effective technologies and the 
establishment of appropriate industrial enterprises, and they had recognized that such 
co-operation should be pursued on a broad international basis. 

6. The Russian Federation supported the Agency's initiative to establish a special fund for 
nuclear disarmament. However, the additional resources should not be restricted to purposes 
relating to the transparency of nuclear disarmament only, but should also be devoted to the 
optimum use of plutonium removed from nuclear military programmes. 
7. The nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan had not only exacerbated the tense 
situation in the region, but had also hindered the efforts of the Agency's Member States to 
strengthen the non-proliferation regime at the global and regional levels. Russia was severely 
disappointed in that regard and called upon both countries to cease any further testing and 
accede immediately to the CTBT and the NPT. 
8. Taking a passive position regarding nuclear inspection activities would not by itself 
suffice to prevent further proliferation of nuclear weapons. The existing legal and verification 
mechanisms of the nuclear non-proliferation regime should therefore be supplemented by the 
development of advanced nuclear technologies which would ensure that energy could be 
generated without posing a threat to that regime. 
9. The advantages, for example, of fuel cycle technologies which did not involve the 
accumulation of weapons-usable fissile materials were self-evident. Integration of the world 
economy and competition in the power market were resulting in the stagnation of nuclear 
power in a number of countries and a reduction in State support for research in areas 
associated with nuclear power and even safety. Steps should be taken to preserve the 
infrastructure and the scientific and technical expertise accumulated so far. Only if society 
learned from the knowledge and culture gained would it be possible to contemplate seriously 
establishing a large-scale nuclear power industry. The Agency should play an important role 
in disseminating that knowledge, using all the means at its disposal. 
10. With regard to the Agency's activities to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear energy in 
developing countries, he said that steps should be taken to ensure that those countries did not 
make the same mistakes as the developed countries. The Agency's work in the area of 
technical co-operation was important, and despite Russia's current economic difficulties, it 
was contributing to the technical co-operation programme by providing equipment, organizing 
and hosting training courses, and offering fellowship training for specialists from developing 
countries. 
11. Finally, Russia endorsed the Annual Report for 1997 and thanked the Secretariat and the 
Director General for their good work. 
12. Mr. MIAH (Bangladesh) welcomed the Republic of Benin to membership of the 
Agency. His country had long been committed to the peaceful use of nuclear science and 
technology in such fields as agriculture, industry and medicine to promote and sustain socioeconomic 
development. It had achieved notable successes in a number of areas, including the 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 6 

development of high-yield varieties of rice and other crops, post-harvest food preservation 
technology, sterilization of medical products and tissue grafts and membranes, radioisotope 
production for medical use, tracer technology, the extraction of heavy minerals from beach 
sands, and environmental monitoring. Those successes would not have been possible without 
the technical assistance of the Agency. 

13. Bangladesh was fully aware of the need for international co-operation in order to 
guarantee the peaceful and safe use of nuclear energy and was a signatory to most of the 
relevant Agency-sponsored treaties and conventions, notably the NPT, the Early Notification 
and Assistance Conventions, the Nuclear Safety Convention and the CTBT. It was also 
actively considering signing the Joint Convention on safe fuel and waste management and the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material. 
14. Bangladesh had participated in formulating Basic Safety Standard BSS115 and had 
already incorporated most of its recommendations into its national rules. The Government 
had taken steps to strengthen the national regulatory body and had launched a project for the 
construction of a radioactive waste processing and storage facility at a cost of 
US $1.5 million. 
15. With the rapid growth of population and the depletion of fossil fuel reserves, the 
international community, and particularly the developing countries, would have to rely 
increasingly on nuclear power. Without adequate and assured electricity supplies, there could 
be no sustainable development. Although his Government had decided to expedite 
implementation of the Rooppur nuclear power project, progress was being hindered by 
constraints faced by the licensing authorities of supplier countries, cost escalation, and by the 
need to take into account safety and environmental considerations. However, following 
meetings with an Agency fact-finding mission in December 1997, an expert group had drawn 
up an action programme for implementing the project, which it had submitted to the Agency's 
Department of Technical Co-operation. Bangladesh would appreciate an early response from 
the Department regarding the proposed programme. 
16. His Government hoped that the IAEA, in line with Article III of its Statute and with 
Article IV of the NPT, would make every effort to ensure that nuclear power technology was 
transferred from the developed world to such countries as Bangladesh, the largest of 
the LDCs, which was in need of increased electricity supplies to feed its fast-growing 
industries and take advantage of the favourable environment created by the globalization of 
trade. 
17. Lastly, he reiterated his Government's firm commitment to implementing the Rooppur 
nuclear power project. Bangladesh had fulfilled all its international treaty obligations, and its 
research reactor had recently come under full-scope Agency safeguards. It was convinced that 
nuclear power should not be used for destructive purposes, but rather to fulfil the hopes and 
aspirations of mankind for a decent quality of life. 
18. Mr. PORGES (Croatia), after welcoming Benin as a new Member State of the 
Agency, said that his country attached the greatest importance to the Agency's technical 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 7 

co-operation programmes. Since becoming a member itself in 1992, Croatia had been 
involved in valuable projects that had contributed to its economic and social development in 
general, and in particular to the harmonization of its legislation with the Agency's standards 
and norms, the establishment of expertise in the fields of radiation protection and waste 
management and the improvement of the skills of its experts through their participation in 
various international conferences and seminars. Croatia had especially appreciated the 
opportunity to demonstrate, on the basis of the Memorandum of Understanding with the 
Agency, the advanced level of its expertise in the application of nuclear techniques in 
radiation protection and safety, radioactive waste management and nuclear medicine. It had 
gained valuable experience not merely as a recipient country but also as a donor country, and 
it hoped that that co-operation with the Agency could be extended. Croatia was deeply 
concerned, however, about the decrease in the expected level of new resources for the 
Technical Co-operation Fund. It was convinced that the Agency's credibility and 
effectiveness could be maintained and strengthened only as long as a satisfactory balance was 
achieved among its main activities. 

19. At the current session of the General Conference he would be signing the Protocol 
Additional to the comprehensive safeguards agreement which Croatia had concluded with the 
Agency in 1994. His country had always strongly advocated a policy of non-proliferation and 
had accordingly become a party to the Non-Proliferation Treaty by virtue of its succession 
in 1992. The Model Additional Protocol had been a major breakthrough in the endeavours to 
strengthen the effectiveness and efficiency of the safeguards system. The universality and 
reliability of safeguards was a priority issue today, as the world strove to cope effectively with 
the threat of proliferation of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction. All Member 
States, both non-nuclear and nuclear, should contribute fully to the attainment of the goals of 
the strengthened safeguards system. In that context, he wished to express his country's deep 
regret about the recent deplorable decision of some governments to conduct nuclear tests-
Croatia was profoundly concerned about the possible negative consequences of such actions 
with regard to regional and global stability and the overall non-proliferation regime. It 
strongly urged those governments to join the vast majority of States in their efforts to curb the 
spread of nuclear arms and to achieve a world free of the nuclear threat. 
20. There had been important accomplishments in nuclear safety, particularly the legally 
binding nuclear safety regime built up under the Agency's auspices. A number of significant 
international conventions had been agreed upon, dealing with early notification of a nuclear 
accident, assistance in the case of a nuclear accident or radiological emergency, nuclear safety 
with respect to land-based nuclear power plants, the safety of spent fuel and radioactive waste 
management and revisions to the regime for international liability. However, Croatia agreed 
with the Director General that there were other areas of nuclear safety in need of binding 
norms and looked forward to co-operating fully with other Member States in that regard. 
21. Of course, adopting binding norms and standards was not all that was required; it was 
equally important to ensure that they were also fully implemented. The experience to be 
gained from the first review meeting of Contracting Parties to the Nuclear Safety Convention 
would not only be essential in determining appropriate ways of ensuring that the goals 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 8 

established by the Convention were achieved, but would also be indispensable for the 
implementation of other conventions that were part of the nuclear safety regime but were still 
not in force. 

22. Croatia was a co-founder and co-owner of the Krsko nuclear power plant built on the 
territory of the Republic of Slovenia. Together with its Slovenian colleagues, it took pride in 
the results achieved so far, particularly in terms of safety and reliability indicators. After the 
establishment of independent and sovereign republics in Slovenia and Croatia, there had been 
divergent views on the original agreement between the joint owners, and great efforts had 
been needed on both sides in order to continue the former successful co-operation. The 
current indicators of safe and reliable operation of the Krsko nuclear power plant confirmed 
that those efforts had not been futile, and he wished to renew his Government's assurances 
that in all future efforts to find a joint approach to operating the Krko nuclear power plant, 
concern for safety would be a priority consideration, in accordance with the widely accepted 
basic international principles of nuclear safety. 
23. In conclusion, he said that Croatia would do its part to contribute to the Agency's 
activities in pursuit of its important mandate as custodian of the peaceful uses of the atom for 
the sustainable advancement of the quality of life and global security for all. 
24. Mr. ENE (Romania) said that since the last session of the General Conference his 
country had undergone further structural changes which had also had a major impact in the 
nuclear field. The process had started with changes in research and had continued in the field 
of regulation, licensing and control, and finally in the nuclear power sector. 
25. The Ministry of Research and Technology had been selected as the guinea pig for public 
administration reform. That process had begun in 1997 with the establishment of a legislative 
framework satisfying the requirements and recommendations of the European Union. As 
of 1999, competition would be the essential criterion for the financing of both R&D and 
innovation, with projects and programmes being selected on the basis of invitations to tender. 
The Ministry's National Research and Development Plan for 1999-2002 had been approved 
by the Government. It aimed to meet Romania's medium- and long-term social and economic 
needs, as established in the Government's programme. The National Atomic Energy Agency, 
a department of the Ministry of Research and Technology, was responsible for conducting the 
national nuclear R&D programme, also called the "nuclear safety" programme. Based on 
IAEA and EURATOM recommendations, its main goals were: to develop and use advanced 
technologies in the nuclear field; to ensure the safe operation of nuclear facilities; and to 
assess the impact of radiation on the public and the environment. The programme was 
subdivided into six areas: nuclear reactors and the nuclear fuel cycle; radioactive waste and 
spent fuel management, including the decommissioning of nuclear facilities; nuclear safety, 
nuclear accident risk assessment and management; assessment of the impact of nuclear 
activities on the environment and restoration of the environment; application of nuclear 
techniques; and support activities, international co-operation, computerization, human 
resources development, installations of national importance. The National Plan was expected 
to stimulate scientific research, technology development and innovation. 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 9 

26. Reforms in the nuclear field had also been promoted by the National Commission for 
Nuclear Activities Control. In 1998, the law on the safe implementation of nuclear activities 
had been modified and supplemented to comply with the requirements of the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety. The main changes were: the designation as the national nuclear regulatory 
body of the National Commission for the Control of Nuclear Activities, now an independent 
body reporting directly to the Government; the transfer of responsibility for environmental 
radiation monitoring from the Ministry of Water, Forests and Environmental Protection to the 
regulatory body; increased funding for the regulatory body; and more far-reaching 
responsibilities for the regulatory body. 
27. The new infrastructure and tasks of the regulatory body had been approved by the 
Government in May 1998. Its staff had been increased to 306, with 60% being involved in 
radiological monitoring of the environment. Conditions were thus in place for improving 
regulation, licensing and control activities, especially since there were also more specialists on 
nuclear power plants and other nuclear facilities on the staff. Romania hoped that the Agency 
would continue to support the training of regulatory body staff. The technical assistance 
received under project ROM/9/007 on licensing of the Cernavoda nuclear power plant was 
much appreciated. That ongoing project, which had started in 1991, was providing important 
support particularly with regard to regulations, safety analysis, quality assurance, radiation 
protection and operator licensing. 
28. On the basis of the recommendations of the IRRT mission carried out in 1992, the 
regulatory body had taken a number of measures to increase its efficiency. It was conducting 
a review of all its activities in order to bring them in line with the requirements of the 
1996 law and with international recommendations and guidelines. The last IRRT mission, 
which had been conducted in 1998, had made useful recommendations for the development of 
future activities. 
29. Earlier that year, the Government had adopted a decision regarding reorganization of the 
Electricity Authority RENEL. As a result, three new companies had been formed: two in the 
nuclear field - the State company "Nuclearoelectrica" and the Independent Nuclear Activities 
Corporation, and a third - the National Electricity Company - for conventional power. The 
main activity of "Nuclearoelectrica" was nuclear power generation, and it was both owner and 
operator of Unit 1 of the Cernavoda nuclear power plant and had been entrusted with the 
construction of Unit 2. The main tasks of the Independent Nuclear Activities Corporation 
were heavy water production for the Cernavoda nuclear power plant and nuclear facility 
construction and operation. All the contracts and agreements signed by the former RENEL 
remained in force. His Government was grateful for the Agency's support of nuclear power 
development in Romania, particularly with regard to training and expertise in the current 
technical co-operation cycle. Romania hoped that it could continue to count on Agency 
technical co-operation, and on supplies from the United States as a major donor in connection 
with the replacement of high-enriched by low-enriched uranium fuel for the TRIGA research 
reactor at the Pitesti Institute for Nuclear Power Research. 
30. His country supported the Director General's initiatives to introduce management 
reforms in the Secretariat in order to increase the Agency's efficiency, and it looked forward 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 10 

to the report which the Senior Expert Group would soon be submitting to the Director General 
and to subsequent discussions in the Board of Governors. 

31. Romania hoped that the new measures contained in the Model Additional Protocol 
would be implemented by all Member States so as to strengthen the international 
non-proliferation regime and planned, for its part, to start negotiations with a view to 
concluding such a protocol towards the end of the year. 
32. The Romanian Ministry of Research and Technology, in co-operation with the Agency, 
was organizing a national public information seminar which was to be held from 
30 September to 2 October to explain to the Romanian public the impact of nuclear energy 
applications on the population and the environment. It would be of interest not only to 
specialists from research institutes and companies, but also to non-governmental 
organizations, the media and central- and local-administration civil servants. He was grateful 
to the Agency's Division of Public Information for the assistance it had provided to ensure 
successful organization of that seminar. 
33. In conclusion, he welcomed the admission of Benin to the Agency. 
34. Mr. CHIDAMBARAM (India), after also welcoming Benin, read out the 
following message to the General Conference from the Indian Prime Minister, Mr. Atal Behari 
Vajpayee: 
"Right from the time of our independence in 1947, our leaders had realized that a 
nuclear-weapon-free world would enhance the security of all nations. That is why 
nuclear disarmament was and continues to be a major plank of our foreign policy. We 
had, therefore, called for a ban on nuclear testing in 1954, the aim of which was to 
prevent further development and stockpiling of nuclear weapons. This was not 
accepted, with the result that two new nuclear-weapon States emerged between then and 
the elaboration of the Non-Proliferation Treaty in 1968. 

"We were among those countries that had participated in good faith in developing the 
concept of a non-proliferation agreement but found that the NPT text that emerged was 
discriminatory. It divided nations between those that were allowed to retain and 
develop nuclear weapons and those that were forbidden the same right. It was also 
unbalanced, and imposed virtually no obligations on nuclear-weapon States, and even 
these limited obligations were not honoured by them. 

"The decades of the 80s and 90s had, meanwhile, witnessed the gradual deterioration of 
our security environment as a result of nuclear and missile proliferation. In our 
neighbourhood, nuclear weapons had increased and more sophisticated delivery systems 
inducted. In addition, India had also been the victim of externally aided and abetted 
terrorism and clandestine war. Under these circumstances, in the interest of national 
security, the Government of India had to take the decision of carrying out nuclearweapon 
tests. 


GC(42)/OR.3 
page 11 

"India's nuclear tests were not intended for offence but for self-defence. We have stated 
that we will not be the first to use nuclear weapons. We are willing to strengthen this 
unilateral commitment by entering into bilateral agreements on no-first-use or 
multilateral negotiations on global-no-first-use. Having stated that we shall not be the 
first to use nuclear weapons, there remains no basis for their use against countries that 
do not have nuclear weapons. 

"We are a responsible nuclear-weapon State. We are also the largest democracy in the 
world. Our non-proliferation credentials are impeccable; no equipment, material or 
technology exported by us to any country has been misused. We have never violated 
any treaty obligation. 

"I reiterate that we shall continue to work towards the elimination of all nuclear 
weapons from the world in a time-bound framework and we earnestly hope that a 
nuclear-weapon-free and peaceful world will one day be a reality. The recent 
Non-Aligned Summit at Durban has called for an international conference on the 
complete elimination of all nuclear weapons within the framework of a time-bound, 
universal and non-discriminatory nuclear weapons convention. 

"We also hope that in such a world the "developing" countries will progress on the path 
to prosperity and become "developed". For this to happen, nuclear energy will have to 
play its due role and the International Atomic Energy Agency should concentrate on this 
important scientific-technological task. 

"I wish the forty-second General Conference of the IAEA success and hope that the 
discussions will be constructive and fruitful." 

35. India had worked for a nuclear-weapon-free world over the past five decades because 
nuclear weapons for none meant security for all. The nuclear-weapon States, as defined by 
the NPT, had ignored the provision in that Treaty which obliged them to work towards nuclear 
disarmament and had even been unwilling to include in the CTBT a provision for a timebound 
framework for nuclear disarmament, as called for by India. With the indefinite 
extension of the NPT in 1995 the prospects for a nuclear-weapon-free world had dimmed 
alarmingly. Consequently, India had been compelled to redefine its security requirements. It 
hoped that the developing world had noticed that the most vehement critics of the recent tests 
had been either the nuclear-weapon States themselves, or other countries which enjoyed the 
security of the nuclear umbrella of a nuclear-weapon State or were not located in a hostile 
neighbourhood. Indeed, the political or geographical proximity of some of those countries to 
a friendly nuclear-weapon State was so obvious that they could perhaps be looked upon as 
surrogate nuclear-weapon States. None of them were developing countries, and their attitude 
smacked worryingly of a new kind of colonialism through technology control. 
36. It was strange that India, which had never violated any treaty obligation, was being 
accused by some of violating the norms of the CTBT, a treaty which had not yet entered into 
force and to which it was not party. He recalled that India had been among the first to sign the 
PTBT prohibiting atmospheric tests, which had entered into force in 1963, and that India had 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 12 

carried out its first underground test in 1974. Two States, one of which was China, had not 
signed the PTBT and had continued to carry out atmospheric tests long after its entry into 
force. 

37. At the recent meeting of the NAM in Durban, the Indian Prime Minister had said that 
his country would be the first to join negotiations to abolish nuclear weapons provided the 
established nuclear-weapon States agreed to enter into such negotiations. The NAM Heads of 
State or Government had concluded that the present situation, in which nuclear-weapon States 
insisted that nuclear weapons provided unique security benefits and yet monopolized the right 
to own them, was highly discriminatory, unstable and unsustainable. With regard to the recent 
nuclear tests in South Asia, the Heads of State had viewed positively the commitment by the 
parties concerned in the region to exercise restraint in the interests of regional security. They 
had recalled that the 1995 NAM summit meeting held in Cartagena had urged the adoption of 
an action plan for the elimination of nuclear weapons within a time-bound framework. Since 
most of NAM's 113 members were also Agency members those views could be expected to 
command a majority in the General Conference. 
38. The developing countries felt that the Conference should concentrate on technical issues 
like nuclear power and not on extraneous political issues better dealt with by the Conference 
on Disarmament in Geneva. Nuclear power development was forging ahead in Asia and 
would soon start to grow in Africa. Resolution GC(41)/RES/13 on strengthening of the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities had made special mention of enhancing the 
scientific and technological capabilities of developing countries in the peaceful applications of 
nuclear energy. With that in mind, the Agency had decided to hold an international seminar 
on "Nuclear Power in Developing Countries: Its Potential Role and the Strategies for its 
Deployment" in India in October 1998. That was appropriate, since the developing countries 
had the greatest need for energy growth and were not allergic to nuclear power like some 
developed countries. 
39. The Agency needed to find ways of preventing scientific co-operation from being 
inhibited by the commercial interests of vendors and of ensuring that safety-related equipment 
and R&D information were readily disseminated without hindrance from arbitrary and 
politically motivated export control regimes. Developing countries tended to hesitate before 
initiating a nuclear power programme because of their unfamiliarity with the steps required. 
In particular, a situation must be avoided where the leadership and public in developing 
countries shied away from introducing nuclear power because they expected safety and 
safeguards to raise daunting problems. The Agency had a key role to play in counteracting 
such inhibitions while, of course, ensuring safety as well as effective and economic 
implementation of its safeguards responsibilities. 
40. In India, the four 220 MW(e) reactors being constructed near Kota in Rajasthan and at 
Kaiga in Karnataka were in advanced stages of construction and expected to go critical 
in 1999. Construction of the two Indian-designed 500MW(e) PHWRs was expected to 
commence at Tarapur soon. Work on major critical nuclear components had already started. 
An intergovernmental agreement had been signed by India and the Russian Federation to 
augment the domestic PHWR programme through the construction of two 1000 MW(e) 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 13 

WWER reactors to be built at Kudankulam in Tamil Nadu. India was also discussing 
international co-operation with Russia on the evolution of the nuclear power and associated 
fuel cycle technologies best suited to addressing global energy needs in a safe and 
cost-effective manner. 

41. Detailed internal reviews had recommended an installed nuclear power capacity for 
India of 20 000 MW(e) by the year 2020. India intended to attain that target by accelerating 
its construction of PHWRs and FBRs and procuring LWRs from friendly countries, followed 
by development of the LWR technology. 
42. Since India had limited uranium and very large thorium resources, it was attracted by the 
idea of using the plutonium produced in the first-generation PHWRs to fuel FBRs and thereby 
make greater use of the thorium reserves. The test FBR at Kalpakkam had been synchronized 
and a power of 1 MW had been fed to the grid in October 1997. All sodium systems and 
steam generators had performed satisfactorily and the plutonium-uranium carbide fuel had 
been tested up to a burnup of 40 000 MW-d/t. After post-irradiation examination it had been 
cleared for a burnup of 50 000 MW-d/t. That facility was also being used for accelerated 
radiation damage tests on zirconium-niobium pressure tube material. In Kalpakkam, design 
and technology development of the 500 MW(e) Prototype Fast Breeder Reactor (PFBR) was 
progressing well. At the same site, the 30 kW Kamini experimental reactor fuelled with 
uranium-233 had achieved full power in September 1997. 
43. To support the power programme and fuel cycle activities a broad base for fundamental 
applied and engineering research had been established. The development of MOX fuel was 
progressing well and both the BWRs at Tarapur had been loaded with such assemblies. 
India's Atomic Energy Regulatory Board was totally committed to all aspects of safety design 
and engineering safety, operational safety and regulatory safety. It was currently 
focusing on enhanced involvement in safety research projects of relevance to regulatory 
decision-making and was also establishing a Safety Research Institute. 
44. A great deal of R&D work was devoted to health, safety and environmental problems. 
Many training and retraining programmes had been organized, including the interregional 
group training programme on radiation protection and safety in medicine, organized jointly 
with the Agency in February under an Agency model project. The Bhabha Atomic Research 
Centre was organizing an eight-week course entitled "IAEA Regional Basic Professional 
Training Course on Radiation Protection" starting in October, and it was hoped that such 
courses would become an annual feature that would help the countries of the region to 
develop qualified radiation protection personnel. 
45. In that context, the Agency should identify centres of excellence for human resource 
development under its TCDC programme, given that developing countries found it easier to 
learn from each other in high technology fields because of their cultural and economic 
similarities. India had for over 40 years been offering a one-year orientation course in nuclear 
technology which was open to scientists and engineers from developing countries. 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 14 

46. In conclusion, he stressed the importance of restoring the original scientific and 
technical character of the Agency. It must not be allowed to degenerate into a shadow 
political forum merely duplicating the debates in the General Assembly. The vast scientific 
and technical knowledge accumulated by the Agency should be disseminated in an unbiased 
fashion to meet the objectives of its Statute, namely to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. The Agency could do 
much to encourage a nuclear safety culture and to ensure that safeguards did not inhibit 
technology development in the area of nuclear power. In that way, the Agency had a major 
role to play in ushering in a new and prosperous age for all humanity. 
47. Mr. EL-FEKI (Egypt) said that his country was committed to worldwide nuclear 
non-proliferation and disarmament. There was a particularly urgent need for progress in those 
areas in the Middle East because Israel's nuclear weapons programme and its obsolete 
doctrine of deterrence posed a threat to peace and stability in the entire region. Accordingly, 
Egypt had been working since 1974 for the establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East and 
on 8 April 1990 President Mubarak had called for the establishment of a zone free of all 
weapons of mass destruction in the region as a logical extension of that principle. In the 
Agency, Egypt had advocated the application of full-scope safeguards to all nuclear 
installations in the Middle East as a vital step towards achieving regional and international 
nuclear non-proliferation. Egypt had also proposed that the Agency develop a model 
agreement concerning safeguards and verification of compliance with the legal obligations 
associated with the establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East. 
48. In response to a request by Egypt, multilateral negotiations on disarmament and regional 
security in the Middle East had been initiated following the 1991 Madrid Middle East Peace 
Conference. Clearly, genuine peace and stability were unattainable in a region where there 
was military imbalance. The resolution on the Middle East adopted by the participants in the 
1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference, including the three depositary States 
(NPT/CONF.l 995/32/RES/l), had reaffirmed the importance the international community 
attached to nuclear disarmament in the region. All those who had supported the resolution, 
particularly the depositary States, had a responsibility to ensure that its provisions were 
implemented. 
49. All the Arab States without exception had acceded to the NPT and placed their nuclear 
facilities under full-scope Agency safeguards. Israel was therefore the only State in the region 
that had not acceded to the Treaty, nor had it declared its intention to do so. It continued to 
pursue a policy of nuclear provocation vis-a-vis its neighbours and refused to place its 
installations under Agency safeguards. The lack of any serious inclination on Israel's part to 
address one of the most complex regional and international security issues had led not only to 
renewed stagnation in regional disarmament efforts but also to a general worsening of the 
political and security situation in the Middle East, since it coincided with an unprecedented 
and extremely worrying deadlock in the peace process that was propelling the region towards 
disaster. Recent events in southern Asia should not distract the world's attention from the 
dangerous situation in the Middle East. The international community had a duty to promote 
the establishment of an NWFZ as a means of redressing the imbalance and thereby 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 15 

strengthening international peace and security. Egypt would work with unabated enthusiasm 
towards that goal and towards promoting the application of full-scope Agency safeguards in 
the Middle East. It would continue to foster dialogue among the parties in the region and to 
encourage the Agency to take preliminary steps to establish an appropriate framework for any 
regional arrangements that might be agreed. He welcomed in that connection the workshop 
on safeguards held in May 1998 in response to a request by Egypt at the previous session of 
the General Conference. However, the fact that the workshop had concentrated on technical 
and general aspects rather than aspects specific to the Middle East region had detracted from 
the impact and success of the event, which had been intended to contribute towards the 
implementation of resolution GC(41)/RES/25 on the application of IAEA safeguards in the 
Middle East. 

50. President Mubarak had announced during the current year a new initiative to promote a 
world free of weapons of mass destruction and had advocated the holding of an international 
conference to achieve that goal within a fixed period of time. Egypt was convinced that the 
elimination of nuclear and other weapons of mass destruction from the Middle East would 
serve the interests of all peoples and promote good neighbourliness. In that connection, Egypt 
and seven other States had issued a joint ministerial declaration on 9 June 1998 entitled 
"Towards a Nuclear Weapons Free World: The Need for a New Agenda". 
51. Alongside non-proliferation, Egypt viewed technical co-operation as a key component 
of the Agency's programme and an integral part of its work to promote the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy. It was therefore concerned at the steady decline in the 
financial resources contributed to the TCF in recent years. During the current year, the 
Secretariat had been forced to draw up contingency plans to deal with a crisis in the TCF and 
both donor and beneficiary countries had found themselves in a very difficult position. The 
situation had improved somewhat in recent months following the payment by some donors of 
arrears of contributions, but a considerable number of States were still dilatory in honouring 
their pledges to the Fund. While some States could reasonably attribute non-payment to 
difficult political and economic circumstances, others seemed to consider that the "voluntary" 
nature of contributions to the TCF conferred some measure of legitimacy on their failure to 
pay. Contributions to the Fund should really be viewed as morally mandatory since all States 
participated in the negotiations to fix the target for the TCF. 
52. A great deal of time and energy had been wasted in the Board of Governors on the 
attempt to negotiate an amendment of Article VI of the Statute. Egypt had repeatedly stressed 
the urgent need to expand the Board so that it reflected the increase in the Agency's 
membership. Such an expansion would enhance the Board's moral and political authority and 
the acceptability of its decisions in the international community. General Conference 
resolution GC(XXV)/RES/389, adopted by consensus at the twenty-fifth regular session, had 
recognized that the areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were underrepresented 
in the Board, and the need to remedy that situation had been reaffirmed in the 
meantime by numerous resolutions, the most recent being resolution GC(41)/RES/20. The 
continuing reluctance to provide Africa with an additional seat violated the right of the 
Agency's largest regional group to equitable representation and was inconsistent with the 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 16 

spirit of the Conference's resolutions. An expanded Board would ensure wider participation 
by all States, particularly the developing countries, in the Agency's activities. It was high 
time to work out a solution that would allow the matter to be closed. 

53. Egypt's second research reactor, with a capacity of 22 MW, had gone critical on 
27 November 1997 and had been officially inaugurated by President Mubarak and President 
Menem of Argentina (which had assisted in implementing the project) on 4 February 1998. 
The reactor would help the country take a major step forward in the development of peaceful 
applications of nuclear technology. Egypt's Atomic Energy Commission had actively 
participated in the project and local industries had manufactured basic components. Strict 
nuclear safety standards had been observed at all stages of the project. 
54. Other areas in which Egypt was pursuing the peaceful uses of nuclear energy included 
radioisotope production facilities in the pharmaceutical sector, the nuclear fuel cycle in the 
context of the second nuclear power reactor and its associated fuel plant, and a heavy water 
pilot plant which was due to come into service in early 1999. A 20 MeV pilot accelerator 
project was being completed in co-operation with the Agency and was also scheduled to come 
into operation in early 1999. The accelerator was an advanced tool for short-lived 
radioisotope production, neutron therapy, nuclear physics research and materials science. 
55. Egypt was committed to developing regional and international co-operation in the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy, especially under the numerous joint programmes that were 
being undertaken in collaboration with the Agency, the Arab Atomic Energy Agency and the 
Middle Eastern Regional Radioisotope Centre for the Arab Countries; it trusted that the 
Agency would increase its support for such national and regional technical co-operation 
projects. 
56. In conclusion, he commended the Director General on his efficient management of the 
Agency's activities, which would undoubtedly enhance its influence in promoting the use of 
nuclear power and other peaceful applications of nuclear technology. 
ARRANGEMENTS FOR THE CONFERENCE 

(a) 
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA AND ALLOCATION OF ITEMS FOR INITIAL 
DISCUSSION 
(GC(42)/2, Corr.1 and Add.1-2) 
57. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the agenda 
for the current session should consist of all the items on the provisional agenda set forth in 
document GC(42)/2, as well as the supplementary item contained in document 
GC(42)/2/Add.1 and the additional item contained in document GC(42)/2/Add.2. 
58. Mr. TIWARI (India) said that his delegation did not agree with the inclusion of the 
item on nuclear testing in the agenda as requested by Australia, Canada, Japan and 
New Zealand. At the June meetings of the Board of Governors, it had been made abundantly 
clear that the Agency was not the correct forum for discussions on the subject of nuclear 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 17 

testing, and he was surprised and pained to see that the entire debate was to be reopened yet 
again, taking up the valuable time of the General Conference. It was especially inappropriate 
for the Agency to be discussing the issue when other forums existed where the issue of 
nuclear testing was of direct relevance. The Conference on Disarmament, for example, had 
the authority to address all matters relating to disarmament and could therefore discuss 
nuclear testing, not in the limited, artificial view of the nuclear-weapon States, but rather in 
the context of global nuclear disarmament, as the developing countries and non-aligned States 
had been wishing for the past five decades. 

59. Having recalled the Agency's functions as set out in Article III of its Statute, he said that 
the Agency had no technical or political competence that could facilitate discussion or 
resolution of the nuclear testing issue. Furthermore, the Preparatory Commission for the 
CTBTO, which did have the technical competence and would also have the legal authority to 
address the issue once the CTBT had been ratified and had entered into force, had already met 
twice to discuss nuclear testing. 
60. At the thirty-ninth regular session of the General Conference, in 1995, a number of 
Member States had expressed similar views. The representative of the United Kingdom had 
said that the Agency, fundamentally a technical organization, was not the correct forum for 
consideration of the nuclear testing issue, that there were other bodies where the issue was 
already receiving active consideration, and that it was for those bodies to pronounce on what 
was essentially a political question1. He had further stated that his delegation did not wish to 
see the Agency become a vehicle for ad hoc national or regional protests on political issues, 
which was incompatible with the Agency's responsibilities and activities as provided for in its 
Statute.2 The representative of China, for his part, had said that the issue of nuclear testing 
did not lie within the Agency's competence and that the issue was being considered in the 
United Nations General Assembly and its First Committee, in the United Nations 
Disarmament Commission and in the Conference on Disarmament. He had also noted that 
raising the issue in the General Conference could interfere with the normal functioning of the 
Agency, which already had a heavy workload, and that the Agency should focus its attention 
and resources on tackling the issues which lay within its competence as effectively as 
possible.3 As for the representative of the United States of America, he had said that political 
issues such as nuclear testing should be addressed in more appropriate international fora and 
that raising the issue of nuclear testing in an organization concerned with the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy was unnecessary and even inappropriate.4 
61. Following the debate at the 1995 session of the General Conference, two countries had 
continued to test in 1996, but it was interesting that the Board and the General Conference had 
chosen to remain silent at that time. 
1 See document GC(39)/OR.10, para. 15. 

2 See document GC(39)/OR.10, para. 16. 

3 See document GC(39)/OR.10, para. 18. 

4 See document GC(3 9)/OR.10, para. 25. 


GC(42)/OR.3 
page 18 

62. Some countries were now preaching against nuclear testing while making every effort 
not only to preserve and secure the nuclear weaponry that a few States currently possessed, 
but also to refine and improve them through various national scientific programmes in order 
to consolidate a discriminatory nuclear world order. The nuclear-weapon States had not made 
a single multilateral nuclear disarmament initiative, let alone reached any agreement on the 
issue of nuclear disarmament. 
63. The security of the four countries that had requested inclusion of the agenda item was 
guaranteed, in one way or another, by the nuclear umbrella, and it should come as no surprise 
that they had chosen not to say anything during the 1995 discussion from which he had 
quoted. He wondered whether their attitude was evidence of a mentality that selectively 
sought to criticize activities in developing countries which, when pursued by members of their 
own club, did not attract criticism. 
64. Mr. UMER (Pakistan) recalled that, when the issue of nuclear testing had been 
discussed at the June meetings of the Board, one of the main reasons why no concrete results 
had been achieved had been the view of some delegations that the Agency was not the 
appropriate forum for the discussion of such issues. His delegation was therefore extremely 
disappointed to see that the item had been included in the agenda for the present session of the 
General Conference. There might have been some justification for including the issue of 
nuclear testing in the agenda for the thirty-ninth session of the General Conference, in 1995, 
but now that an organization which was competent to address nuclear testing issues existed, 
he wondered what purpose would be served by discussing the matter further in a specialized 
technical agency such as the IAEA. 
65. Turning to the explanatory memorandum submitted by Australia, Canada, Japan and 
New Zealand, which described the tests conducted by Pakistan as a challenge to the integrity 
of the NPT, he recalled that his country had supported the adoption of the NPT by the General 
Assembly in 1968 and had, for 25 years, tried to keep nuclear weapons out of South Asia. 
Pakistan had tabled several proposals promoting the universality of the Treaty and yet no 
country, including the four that had submitted the explanatory memorandum, had paid 
anything but lip service to its efforts. The Agency was not the Secretariat of the NPT, and was 
involved with the Treaty only to the extent of its safeguards activities. The threat to the 
non-proliferation regime arose out of the stockpiles of nuclear weapons and the disregard of 
Article VI of the NPT, not the nuclear tests, a fact that the four countries submitting the 
memorandum had conveniently chosen to ignore. As to the statement that the tests were a 
challenge to the CTBT, he recalled that Pakistan had supported the CTBT at the Conference 
on Disarmament in Geneva and at the General Assembly and had participated actively in the 
negotiating process. Furthermore, Pakistan had not initiated the tests; they had been 
conducted in self-defence to restore the strategic balance in the region. 
66. With reference to the last paragraph of the explanatory memorandum, he asked himself 
how Pakistan could have violated the objective of seeking to accelerate and enlarge the 
contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world with its 
tests. It had also done nothing to subvert peace and international co-operation. As to the 
objective of furthering the establishment of safeguarded worldwide disarmament, tens of 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 19 

thousands of nuclear weapons had been developed since the Agency's inception, making him 
wonder how great a role the Agency had actually played in promoting worldwide nuclear 
disarmament. In any case, Pakistan had not violated any of the agreements to which it was a 
party, and had fulfilled all its obligations under its safeguards agreements with the Agency. 

67. In conclusion, he observed that in his delegation's view, the supplementary item 
requested by Australia, Canada, New Zealand and Japan did not strictly meet the requirements 
laid down in the Statute for matters to be discussed by the General Conference. 
68. The PRESIDENT asked whether the Conference, having duly noted the statements 
made by the delegations of India and Pakistan, could agree to the inclusion in its agenda of all 
the items recommended by the General Committee. 
69. It was so decided. 
70. The PRESIDENT said that, as regarded the allocation of items for initial 
discussion, the General Committee recommended that all the items listed in document 
GC(42)/2 be taken up for discussion as indicated in that document. It further recommended 
that the supplementary item entitled "Nuclear testing" and the additional item entitled 
"Participation of Palestine in the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency" be taken 
up directly in the Plenary. 
71. It was so decided. 
72. The PRESIDENT, turning to the order of items, said that the General Committee 
recommended that the supplementary item entitled "Nuclear testing" be taken up immediately 
after item 19 of the provisional agenda, thus becoming item 20, that the order of the items 
"Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East", and "Israeli nuclear capabilities and 
threat" be reversed, with the former remaining item 21 and the latter becoming item 22, and 
that the additional item, "Participation of Palestine in the work of the International Atomic 
Energy Agency", be taken up immediately after "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat", thus 
becoming item 23, with the remaining items being renumbered accordingly. It was 
understood that that order could be modified, in the light of progress, as long as due notice 
was given. 
73. Mr. AMIR (Israel), referring to the General Committee's recommendation to 
reverse the order of items 20 and 21 of the provisional agenda, said that the item on the 
application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East had in the past been the subject of a 
consensus resolution, whereas the item on Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat was an 
obvious attempt at political harassment that would inevitably disrupt confidence and 
co-operation. Israel would be compelled to examine the outcome of the discussions on Israeli 
nuclear capabilities and threat before formulating its position on any resolution regarding the 
application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East. If the order of the items was reversed as 
recommended by the General Committee, Israel would not be able to support any resolution 
under the item "Application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East", not even a consensus 
resolution like that adopted the previous year. 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 20 

74. Mr. RITCH (United States of America) said that his delegation did not intend to 
block any consensus, but wished to point out that the issue raised by Israel had serious 
implications. The two items in question should be considered in an order conducive to 
compromise and consensus, and he was concerned that taking the items in the order suggested 
by the General Committee might not be the most productive course to take. 
75. Mr. KAREM (Egypt) wondered how it would be possible to take up the agenda 
items in an order conducive to compromise and consensus when one item was being held 
hostage to the other. 
76. The PRESIDENT asked the Conference whether it wished to adopt the General 
Committee's recommendation as to the order of items. 
77. 
It was so decided. 
78. The PRESIDENT noted that since the Conference had decided to accept the 
General Committee's recommendation to include the additional item entitled "Participation of 
Palestine in the work of the International Atomic Energy Agency" in the agenda, it would be 
necessary, if the item was to be taken up during the current week, to waive that part of Rule 15 
of the Rules of Procedure which stated that an additional item could not be considered within 
seven days of its being placed on the agenda unless a two-thirds majority decided otherwise. 
She asked the Conference whether it was prepared to do so without a vote. 
79. 
It was so decided. 
(b) 
CLOSING DATE OF THE SESSION AND OPENING DATE OF THE NEXT 
SESSION 
80. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee recommended that the General 
Conference set Friday, 25 September, as the closing date of the forty-second regular session; 
it further recommended that the forty-third regular session should open on Monday, 
27 September 1999, in Vienna. 
81. 
The Committee's recommendations were adopted. 
Mr. Frster (Netherlands^) took the Chair. 

REQUESTS FOR THE RESTORATION OF VOTING RIGHTS 

82. The PRESIDENT said that the General Committee had had before it requests for 
the restoration of voting rights under Article XIX. A of the Statute from Belarus, Kazakhstan, 
Afghanistan and Kenya. 
83. With some reservations, the Committee had recommended that Belarus's right to vote 
during the present session be restored. The request from Kazakhstan had been rejected on the 
basis of the information currently available, but the Committee was willing to reconsider 
Kazakhstan's request at its next meeting if additional information was received. With regard 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 21 

to Afghanistan and Kenya, the Committee had recommended that their right to vote during the 
present session be restored. 

Ms. Lajous Vargas (Mexico) resumed the Chair. 

84. The PRESIDENT, having thanked Ambassador Frster for conducting the 
Conference's discussions on restoration of voting rights, said she took it that the General 
Conference agreed to approve the General Committee's recommendation to restore the voting 
rights of Belarus, Afghanistan and Kenya and consider Kazakhstan's request further once 
more information had been received. 
85. It was so decided. 
86. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that it had been his understanding that the 
criteria or guidelines for consideration of requests for the restoration of voting rights 
contained in document GC(42)/10 were to have been considered and adopted by the Plenary 
before the General Committee's recommendations on the restoration of voting rights were 
accepted. 
87. The PRESIDENT said that the criteria or guidelines for consideration of requests 
for the restoration of voting rights would be taken up once a recommendation on the subject 
had been made by the Committee of the Whole. 
GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (resumed) 
(GC(42)/5) 

88. Mr. AGHAZADEH (Islamic Republic of Iran), having welcomed Benin as a new 
member of the Agency, said that the international community expected the Agency to uphold 
nuclear safety and enforce international treaties designed to protect life and the environment 
against the potential threats associated with the applications of nuclear energy. The NPT 
should be complied with fully and without prejudice by all its signatory States. The nuclearweapon 
States, the main proponents of the NPT, bore a particular responsibility towards the 
world population for reconciling the Treaty's objectives with the realities of its 
implementation and for reconciling the rights and obligations of the signatories, which was 
essential if the Review Conference in the year 2000 was to achieve its objectives and 
confidence in the NPT maintained. 
89. The recent test explosions by India and Pakistan were a cause of grave concern among 
the NPT signatories in South Asia and the Middle East. With the actual number of nuclearweapon 
States increasing, the real objective of the NPT was being undermined and the fear of 
an unwanted regional arms race was growing. He appealed to India and Pakistan, whose 
respective founding fathers had been strong proponents of peace, to accede to the NPT to 
avert the dangerous consequences of such a race. Their accession to the NPT as well as the 
CTBT would help strengthen the non-proliferation regime and enhance regional security and 
world peace. 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 22 

90. Regrettably, Israel continued to refuse to accede to the NPT and was supported in so 
doing by some nuclear-weapon States. That, coupled with Israel's silence with regard to the 
production and stockpiling of nuclear weapons, was the main stumbling block to the 
establishment of an NWFZ in the Middle East. If the nuclear-weapon States were sincere in 
their non-proliferation commitments, they should welcome the initiatives of the Middle East 
NPT signatories aimed at the formation of such a zone. A vital step towards achieving that 
objective was to place all the nuclear installations in the region under Agency safeguards 
inspections. 
91. The role of the peaceful uses of nuclear science and technology in raising standards of 
living and developing industry, agriculture and medicine was irrefutable, and would be crucial 
in the decades to come. Considerations such as the increasing world population and the 
growing demand for primary energy sources, particularly electricity, limited fossil fuel and 
water resources, and the need for better waste management, improved safety and advanced 
technologies would make the use of nuclear technology for energy production inevitable. The 
same was true of the application of radioisotopes, radioactive materials and irradiation 
devices. 
92. Accordingly, the Agency's efforts to promote the peaceful uses of nuclear technology in 
Member States, and to encourage co-operation between Member States in that regard deserved 
commendation. However, political constraints to which the nuclear industry was subject, and 
especially the severe restrictions imposed by some industrial States on the transfer of nuclear 
technology to the developing countries, had caused numerous difficulties for the latter. Peace 
and development were inalienable rights of the signatories to the NPT under Article IV of 
which special consideration was to be given to the developing areas of the world. 
Globalization of nuclear technology was essential, and biased approaches and restrictive 
regimes in the field of technology transfer were totally unjustifiable. 
93. He welcomed the notable results achieved over the past few years by the Agency with 
respect to nuclear safety, radiation protection and the disposal of radioactive waste. While the 
conclusion of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention on the Safety of 
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management was of 
particular significance, what was ultimately needed was all-encompassing international 
co-operation in those areas without the restrictive policies of the industrialized States. Given 
that inadequate nuclear safety in one country could have adverse transboundary consequences, 
any refusal to co-operate for political, or other, reasons was unacceptable, and the Agency 
must be allowed full scope to provide assistance and co-operation. 
94. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Agency's Statute, and in particular 
the question of expansion of the Board, he said that the number of seats allocated to the 
MESA and the Africa areas should be increased in order to achieve the parity between the 
regional groups long sought under previous General Conference resolutions. Decisions 
concerning the composition of each regional group were the responsibility of the group itself. 
Close co-operation with the Organization of the Islamic Conference, which comprised more 
than 50 member countries, could help the Agency solve its problems in that regard, and 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 23 

indeed he would suggest that a permanent seat on the Board be given to the Member State 
providing the presidency of that Organization. 

Mr. Zaide (Philippines') took the Chair. 

95. Mr. HASSAN (Sudan) praised the Director General's achievements during his 
first year in office, particularly his initiatives aimed at reforming the Agency, for which he 
could count on Sudan's full support. 
96. The Agency had endeavoured since its establishment to harness the potential of nuclear 
energy for the advancement of humankind and to prevent its use for purposes that threatened 
human life and the environment by establishing and consolidating the safeguards system. 
Sudan thanked the Agency for its legal and technical assistance in promoting the safe use of 
radioactive materials, which had permitted the development of a comprehensive legal 
framework for the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 
97. Sudan attached great importance to the Agency's role in promoting forms of 
international co-operation which gave developing countries and especially LDCs access to the 
benefits of advanced nuclear technology, particularly in the areas of health, agriculture and 
environmental protection. Such co-operation included prospecting for and quantitative and 
qualitative assessment of groundwater, occupational radiation safety, environmental and food 
protection, national and regional training courses, and the provision of materials and 
equipment. 
98. Sudan had endeavoured to honour its obligations to the TCF in 1998 and would make 
every effort to do so again in 1999. 
99. Noting that AFRA had had a positive impact on co-operation and development in the 
African States over the past ten years, he urged donor countries to continue supporting its 
programmes, especially in the areas of food safety, medicine, water supply and industry. 
100. He stressed the need to strike a balance between the Agency's technical assistance and 
its safeguards programmes at a time when the developing countries, especially the LDCs, as 
exporters of raw materials and importers of manufactured goods, were faced with unfair 
competition as a result of globalization and deregulation of markets and could expect nothing 
but further impoverishment and marginalization in the future. There could be no justice or 
equity in international relations until the developing countries were provided through the 
United Nations system with the technical assistance they needed to raise their productive 
capacity to competitive levels. Sudan hoped that the Agency under its current leadership 
would work for an increase in technical assistance to foster the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy for sustainable development. 
101. The greatest threat facing the international community was the proliferation of weapons 
of mass destruction, which made no distinction between developing and developed countries. 
The recent nuclear tests had come as no surprise and they would certainly not be the last. The 
problem had its roots in the imbalance in international relations and would not be solved by 

GC(42)/OR.3 
page 24 

imposing sanctions on the States concerned, a step that would merely exacerbate the situation. 
Double standards were being used in dealing with States that violated international law; the 
outstanding example was Israel, which ignored the injunctions of the international community 
with impunity, while the people of Iraq were subjected to hunger and disease on the pretext of 
ensuring the elimination of weapons of mass destruction. With a view to solving the problem 
of nuclear weapons once and for all, Sudan welcomed the idea of holding a conference of 
foreign ministers to prepare a summit meeting that would set a timetable for the elimination of 
nuclear weapons. 

102. The issue of fair representation of the developing countries in the Board of Governors 
had been on the Conference's agenda for many years. As the Agency's membership grew, the 
areas of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia were increasingly under-represented. 
Resolution GC(XXV)/RES/389 had called on the Agency to remedy the situation, which 
would necessitate amending Article VI of the Statute. His country supported the African 
proposal whereby the membership of the Board would be increased by seven seats, and 
opposed the linkage of the expanded membership with the issue of the composition of 
geographical groups. It was for the groups themselves to determine their membership and no 
State should be imposed on a group against its will. 
103. Recalling General Assembly resolution 52/250 on the participation of Palestine in the 
work of the United Nations, he urged the General Conference during its current session to 
upgrade the status of Palestine in the Agency as well. 
104. Sudan had recently been the victim of an unjustifiable air attack launched by the United 
States of America on a factory in Khartoum on the pretext that it was producing chemical 
weapons. It had in fact been manufacturing drugs for medical and veterinary purposes. The 
attack had destroyed the plant, injured a number of its employees and terrified the people 
living in the surrounding area. The factory was a private enterprise financed by Sudanese 
investors and the PTA Bank, an institution operated by the Common Market for Eastern and 
Southern Africa (COMESA). A number of foreign officials and ambassadors accredited to 
the Sudan had visited the factory, which was viewed as a model regional investment and 
funding project. It had met over 50% of the country's demand for medicines, especially 
life-saving drugs, and exported some of its products to neighbouring countries. The export of 
its medical products to Iraq under the "oil-for-food" programme had been approved by 
UNSCOM. The destruction of the factory would leave Sudanese children and women 
exposed to such life-threatening diseases as malaria, tuberculosis and bilharziasis. The 
Sudanese authorities would welcome any expert mission to investigate the facts of the case 
and the impact of the air strike. 
The meeting rose at 1.30 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.4 
30 December 1998 
GENERAL Distr. 

International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 

FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 
RECORD OF THE FOURTH PLENARY MEETING 
Held at the Austria Center Vienna 


on Tuesday, 22 September 1998, at 3 p.m. 
President: Mr. ZAIDE (Philippines) 
Later: Mr. CODORNI PUJALS (Cuba) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 
7 General debate and Annual Report for 1997 (continued) 1-181 
Statements made by the delegates of: 

Germany 1-12 
Pakistan 13-23 
Belarus 24-35 
Kenya 36-48 
United Kingdom 49-57 
France 58-74 
Myanmar 75-79 
Holy See 80-85 
Indonesia 86-94 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 
98-03460 (XXXIX) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 

Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 


GC(42)/OR.4 
page 2 

Item of the 
agenda* 

CONTENTS 
(Contd.) 

Canada 

Sweden 

Slovenia 

Chile 
Switzerland 

Norway 

Tunisia 

Denmark 
Czech Republic 

Ireland 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 

of Nuclear Materials 

Paragraphs 

95 -106 
107-111 
112-117 
118-125 
126-135 
136-148 
149-156 
157-162 
163 -170 
171-177 

178-181 


ABACC 

AFRA 

ARCAL 

ASEAN 

CTBT 
CTBTO 
DPRK 
Early 

Notification 
Convention 
EURATOM 
INES 
Joint Convention 

KANUPP 
KEDO 
Kyoto Conference 

LDC 
MESA 
MOX 

NAM 

NPT 
NPT Review and 
Extension Conference 

NPT Review 
Conference 
OSART 
Paris Convention 

Pelindaba Treaty 
PWR 
Quadripartite 

Agreement 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 3 

Abbreviations used in this record 

Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear 

Materials 
African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 

Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 
European Atomic Energy Community 
International Nuclear Event Scale 
Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the 
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management 
Karachi nuclear power plant 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
Third Conference of the Parties to the 1992 United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
Least developed country 
Middle East and South Asia 
Mixed oxide 

Non-Aligned Movement 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferationof Nuclear Weapons 

Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 
of Nuclear Weapons 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy 
(July 1960) 
African Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone Treaty 
Pressurized water reactor 
Agreement between the Republic of Argentina, the Federative Republic 
of Brazil, the Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control 
of Nuclear Materials and the International Atomic Energy Agency for 
the Application of Safeguards 


GC(42)/OR.4 
page 4 

RBMK 
RCA 

RIA 
SAGTAC 
START 

TCDC 

TCF 

Transport Regulations 

UNDP 

UNICEF 

UNSCOM 

Vienna Convention 

WFP 
WHO 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 
(Contd.) 


High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 


Radioimmunoassay 
Standing Advisory Group on Technical Assistance and Co-operation 
Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material 
United Nations Development Programme 
United Nations Children's Fund 
United Nations Special Commission 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (May 1963) 
World Food Programme 
World Health Organization 
Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 



GC(42)/OR.4 
page 5 

GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (continued) 
(GC(42)/5) 

1. Mr. STAHL (Germany) fully endorsed the statement made by the delegate of 
Austria on behalf of the European Union. Given the fact that the Agency would be called 
upon to play an even more important role at the threshold of the twenty-first century than in 
the 40 previous years, he welcomed the Director General's efforts to modernize the 
organization and to introduce the required effectiveness and efficiency, in particular in 
co-operation with the senior expert group, which had almost completed its consultations. It 
would be important not only to streamline the Agency, but also to preserve its objective 
character and hence its world reputation. The proposed World Nuclear Report fitted in well 
with the modernization efforts and could become a doubly effective guiding instrument, both 
as a reference document for delegations contributing to General Conference debates and as the 
basis for more objective discussion in the media and among the public. 
2. As to the Agency's role in the coming decades, Germany considered that it should firstly 
be an action centre for the development of peaceful uses of nuclear energy worldwide and for 
safeguards inspections, and secondly a forum for the exchange of opinions on 
non-proliferation and nuclear weapons reduction policies. 
3. The first of those roles was particularly important in the field of nuclear safety and 
radioactive waste. In elaborating the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint Convention 
on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste 
Management, the Agency had made a further contribution over the past two years to the 
development of what was now generally known as a nuclear safety culture, without which it 
was impossible to win or regain public confidence in nuclear energy. 
4. Another related Agency function was to draw attention to the importance of nuclear 
power in terms of both the environment and energy provision. The anticipated increase in the 
world population over the coming decades would inevitably lead to greater energy demand, if 
future generations were to enjoy an appropriate standard of living. Energy-saving measures 
and the use of renewable resources, although important, would not be sufficient. The use of 
more fossil-fuel power plants would cause long-term damage to the world's climate by 
releasing carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases. The nuclear facilities currently in 
service, which were constantly being improved, had demonstrated that the risks associated 
with them were controllable and that they made an appreciable contribution both to meeting 
energy demand and to protecting the climate. Faced with widespread problems of acceptance, 
the Agency had the difficult and constant task of drawing attention as objectively as possible 
to technical and legislative progress in the areas of safety, transport and the storage of nuclear 
waste. 
5. In Germany, more stringent safety standards had been introduced at two new types of 
reactor: the European pressurized water reactor, developed by French and German nuclear 
engineers, and the boiling water reactor (SWR 1000), developed by German electricity supply 
companies and Siemens AG. Germany was confident that both types of reactor, which would 
come into service over the next 20 years, would open up new prospects for nuclear 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 6 

technology. In addition, considerable progress had been made with the disposal of nuclear 
waste in the Gorleben salt dome - experts from all over the world were constantly monitoring 
progress there. Germany would be pleased to collaborate more closely with the Agency in 
that connection, and to participate in meetings of international experts for the purpose of 
reviewing the latest findings. 

6. Finally, with regard to the international co-operation being implemented with Agency 
support to improve safety at Eastern European reactors, he said that a number of German 
companies were working closely with Eastern European operators to achieve greater 
information exchange. 
7. The Agency's second role was as the centre of the international safeguards system. The 
existence of effective safeguards contributed significantly to maintaining public confidence in 
a credible non-proliferation regime. Germany welcomed the fact that the Agency had 
succeeded in improving and modernizing its safeguards system by approving the Model 
Additional Protocol. The priority now was to apply the new system on a universal basis as 
soon as possible, and to integrate it into the existing system in an efficient and cost-effective 
way. The new system could not become fully effective and efficient until all Member States 
were participating fully in it. 
8. The Agency also served as a forum for the exchange of opinions on non-proliferation 
issues. The nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan had once again demonstrated that 
the spread of weapons of mass destruction was the greatest threat to security in the 
twenty-first century. It must be opposed with greater determination than ever. The main 
instruments for doing so were the NPT and the decisions taken by the 1995 NPT Review and 
Extension Conference. The NPT Review Conference to be held in the year 2000 and the next 
meeting of the Preparatory Committee in April 1999 should strengthen the NPT and the 
international nuclear non-proliferation regime based on it. The most important thing was to 
achieve universal validity for the NPT, an objective that remained a priority for his 
Government. 
9. The signing of the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty by 150 countries was the 
expression of the desire of an overwhelming majority in the international community to 
eliminate nuclear testing once and for all. The events of May 1998 represented a serious 
setback in that regard. It was thus all the more important that all States which had not done so 
should sign and ratify the Treaty soon, thereby reaffirming their commitment to a universal 
and comprehensive ban on nuclear testing and making it possible for the CTBT to come into 
force. Germany had ratified the Treaty in August 1998. It would also do its utmost to support 
the future development of the CTBTO and its verification system. 
10. Germany had a strong desire to see the DPRK and Iraq comply fully with their 
obligations and co-operate with the Agency, and it also expected the programme to combat 
illegal trafficking in radioactive substances to be continued with the appropriate emphasis. 
11. No less important than the measures to prevent proliferation were the efforts in the area 
of nuclear-weapons reduction. The conclusion of an agreement banning the production of 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 7 

fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices was the next logical 
step in the process of nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. The decision taken 
on 11 August by the Conference on Disarmament to set up an ad hoc committee to negotiate 
such a treaty brought the objective of banning the production of fissile material for military 
purposes much closer. The German Government would do all in its power to enable the 
committee to begin and successfully complete its work as soon as possible. Germany 
welcomed the progress which had been made, bilaterally, multilaterally and, in particular, 
with the Agency's involvement, towards the irrevocable withdrawal of weapons-grade nuclear 
material from the military sector, in particular plutonium, and placing it under international 
control. 

12. The problems which he had outlined could only be resolved if the Agency and its 
Member States worked closely together. In order to achieve that, there would sometimes be 
an unavoidable need for world opinion, led by the United Nations and the Agency, to exert the 
necessary pressure on reluctant States. The future of the planet and of future generations 
could only be guaranteed if all States respected the necessarily strict rules in that context. 
13. Mr. AHMAD (Pakistan), after welcoming Benin on its admission to the Agency, 
said that although the beginning of the 1990s had seen the end of the Cold War, the century 
was ending with dismal scenes that reflected supreme human folly. Massacres and genocide 
had been committed in Africa, Europe and Asia, while for Pakistan and its region the most 
regrettable incident had been the nuclear explosion carried out by India on 11 May. Pakistan 
had not reacted instantly or impulsively. It had looked to the major Powers to provide it with 
security guarantees in the light of that terrible event, which had had serious and immediate 
repercussions. Its hopes dashed, Pakistan had taken the difficult, but necessary, decision to 
conduct tests - purely as a defensive response, as it had no aggressive designs against anyone. 
The tests had simply served to restore the strategic balance in the region. 
14. There could be no doubt that India was responsible for the nuclearization of South Asia. 
Pakistan, as a responsible member of the international community, had no intention of 
aggravating the situation. It had therefore adopted a position which took account of the goal 
of nuclear non-proliferation, as well as its national interests, and had announced a unilateral 
moratorium on nuclear testing, in accordance with the CTBT. It had also expressed its 
willingness to consider acceding to the CTBT. As was well known, Pakistan had played a 
constructive role during the finalization of the Treaty's text and had voted in its favour at the 
United Nations. Pakistan was also discussing with friendly countries means of stabilizing the 
situation in the region. However, Pakistan would not be coerced into acceding to the CTBT 
or any other treaty. As in every democratic country, the Government took account of public 
opinion and would not bow to external pressures. Pakistan continued to support total nuclear 
disarmament and nuclear non-proliferation, both vertical and horizontal. It had pledged, at the 
highest level, not to transfer sensitive nuclear technology, and had kept scrupulously to that 
promise. That stance should be recognized by freer exchange of information and technology 
among responsible States. 
15. The Agency was undoubtedly the most efficient and productive of all the United 
Nations technical organizations. Its focus should continue to be on technical promotional 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 8 

activities. Unfortunately, for a number of years, political issues and debates had taken up an 
increasing proportion of the time and effort of the Secretariat and the policy-making organs. 
Certain matters discussed in Vienna were best left to New York and Geneva. There had also 
been an excessive shift in favour of the Agency's verification role. Although safeguards were 
clearly a basic Agency function, they provided only a legal framework for the organization's 
main objective, which was the promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. 

16. There was now general agreement among governments and the main donor bodies that 
water and energy would be central to development problems in the coming decades. The 
Agency was well placed, from both the technical and institutional points of view, to make a 
vital contribution to solving those problems. The exploration and optimum utilization of fresh 
water resources ranked high among the development priorities of a large number of Member 
States. The important role of nuclear techniques in such activities was well recognized, and 
the scientific forum taking place in parallel with the General Conference was a commendable 
initiative. He also welcomed the fact that nuclear energy and sustainable development had 
been chosen as the topic for the 1999 scientific forum. 
17. Of all the nuclear technologies, energy production had the greatest potential for 
achieving socio-economic impact. Regrettably, the growth of nuclear power, in both 
industrialized and developing countries, had slowed down over the past 20 years, partly for 
economic reasons, but mainly because of ill-informed decisions. On the positive side, some 
European countries seemed likely to review their decision to abandon nuclear power. A 
number of Asian countries had committed themselves to nuclear power or were keenly 
interested in doing so. The Agency should adopt a proactive role to strengthen the technical 
infrastructure of Member States interested in nuclear power and consideration could also be 
given to setting up a nuclear power fund. 
18. Technical co-operation was the cornerstone of the Agency's promotional activities. 
Pakistan congratulated the Department of Technical Co-operation on having achieved a record 
implementation rate of 76.2% in 1997. That figure - especially as it had been achieved in the 
first year of a biennial cycle - was proof of the high quality of the Department's planning and 
management, and of its hard work. It was also clear that the overprogramming authorized by 
the Board had facilitated the effective utilization of technical co-operation resources. 
However, pledges to the TCF had fallen during the year to their lowest ever level - 70.2% of 
the target - resulting in a sharp decline in available resources as compared to 1995 and 1996. 
Despite serious financial difficulties, Pakistan had, as usual, paid its full contribution 
for 1998. It intended to pay its share of the 1999 target and urged all Member States to do 
likewise. 
19. The increasing use of technical co-operation among developing countries was 
encouraging and efforts to identify appropriate centres of excellence in developing Member 
States should be pursued. Pakistan was willing to share with other developing countries its 
modest knowledge and experience in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. It 
regularly offered places in its laboratories to Agency trainees in agriculture, medicine, industry 
and hydrology. Pakistan had also greatly benefited from its participation in RCA activities. It 
appreciated the work which had been done in drawing up the Guidelines and Operating Rules 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 9 

for the RCA programme and in identifying the RCA's objectives for the first 25 years of the 
next century. He hoped that the parties to the RCA would do their utmost to translate those 
concepts into reality. 

20. Turning to the activities of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission (PAEC) over the 
past year, he said that the two research reactors and the Karachi nuclear power plant had 
continued to operate safely. Pakistan was grateful to the Agency for its assistance in 
upgrading safety at the KANUPP reactor. Construction of the Chashma nuclear power plant 
was proceeding satisfactorily; it was due to be connected to the grid before the end of 1999. 
Officials from that plant had taken part in several OSART missions, and one at the plant itself 
was planned for the first quarter of 1999. He thanked the Agency for the valuable assistance it 
had provided at various stages of the plant's construction, and said that Pakistan looked 
forward to continued co-operation during the operational phase. Pakistan's main research 
institute, the Pakistan Institute of Nuclear Science and Technology, was engaged in several 
Agency-funded projects. 
21. The agricultural centres of the Pakistan Atomic Energy Commission had successfully 
used mutation methods to achieve several improved varieties of food and cash crops. Five 
varieties of wheat, cotton, chickpea and rape had been approved for cultivation over the 
previous year. A number of training activities had been organized in Pakistan in the context 
of the interregional Model Project on the utilization of salt-affected land. Field trials were 
under way to evaluate several mutants resistant to cotton leaf curl virus which had been 
developed at PAEC centres through the application of nuclear and genetic techniques. The 
cotton variety NIAB-Karishma, developed in 1997, now covered about one third of the cotton 
growing area of Punjab province. Pakistan's National Institute for Biotechnology and Genetic 
Engineering had developed a biofertilizer which had greatly increased rice and legume yields. 
The ten medical centres of the PAEC were providing diagnostic and therapeutic treatment for 
almost 250 000 patients per year. Two more nuclear medicine centres would come into 
service at the end of the current year. 
22. A well-developed safety culture was an essential component of any successful nuclear 
programme. In Pakistan, the regulatory body was gradually becoming more independent from 
the authority responsible for the operation of nuclear facilities. Thus, some of the powers of 
the PAEC had been delegated to a semi-autonomous body, the Pakistan Nuclear Regulatory 
Board, which formulated and applied national nuclear safety and radiation protection policies 
and also supervised the activities of the Directorate of Nuclear Safety and Radiation 
Protection. A draft law had been submitted to parliament for approval. Pakistan had signed 
and ratified the Convention on Nuclear Safety, and would be submitting its national report to 
the forthcoming meeting of the Contracting Parties. Pakistan called upon all countries with 
nuclear power programmes which had not yet done so to accede to that Convention and ratify 
it without delay in order to enhance nuclear safety worldwide. 
23. He expressed appreciation for the many initiatives that the Director General had already 
taken, particularly the setting-up of the senior expert group and the revitalization of the 
internal review process. Consultations could be held in order to reconcile the various 
recommendations and implement the agreed measures. Finally, he noted that some progress 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 10 

had been made towards resolving the issue of amending Article VI of the Statute, and urged 
the General Conference to strive to achieve the desired consensus. 

24. Mr. KENIK (Belarus) said that his country greatly appreciated the work of the 
Agency, which since its inception had made great efforts to strengthen nuclear safety, to 
prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons, and to improve intergovernmental co-operation 
in the field of the peaceful utilization of nuclear energy." 
25. Since its independence, Belarus had made the universal application of the principles of 
non-proliferation one of its main foreign policy priorities, and it attached great importance to 
the Agency's activities in that sphere. It had ratified START and, as a non-nuclear-weapon 
State, had acceded to the NPT and signed a safeguards agreement with the Agency. It had 
been one of the first Member States of the United Nations to sign the CTBT. In April 1992 it 
had commenced withdrawing tactical nuclear weapons from its territory, a task which was 
completed in 1997. 
26. Having voluntarily renounced the possession of nuclear weapons, Belarus was very 
appreciative of the Agency's efforts to facilitate the establishment of nuclear-weapon-free 
zones. It welcomed the conclusion of agreements to set up such zones in the southern 
hemisphere, and had consistently advocated that similar initiatives be taken in the northern 
hemisphere. Belarus was very concerned at the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan, 
and believed strongly that countries which committed themselves to a nuclear programme 
should take all necessary steps to avoid aggravating regional and global tension. 
27. As the first State to propose the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in Central 
and Eastern Europe, Belarus firmly believed that before such a zone was set up, the 
nuclear-weapon States should provide assurances that they would not use or threaten to use 
nuclear weapons against other States which might wish to belong to such a zone, and that the 
countries concerned should commit themselves to binding legal and political undertakings, 
both unilaterally and on a reciprocal basis, thereby demonstrating their support for 
denuclearization objectives and helping to enhance nuclear security and confidence in Europe. 
28. Belarus had no nuclear power plants, and attached the greatest importance to optimizing 
the radiation protection of its population, which was still suffering on a daily basis from the 
effects of the Chernobyl accident - the most serious radiological accident that had ever 
occurred. The main lesson to be drawn from that grim experience was that serious nuclear 
accidents had direct or indirect consequences far beyond the frontiers of the State where the 
accident occurred. That fact had led the Agency to embark on work aimed at broadening and 
strengthening international co-operation in a number of areas: improving the operational 
safety of RBMK reactors; planning complex medical and other countermeasures for 
application in different types of emergency; adopting criteria for dealing with the 
consequences of accidents and for co-ordinating protection measures; strengthening the legal 
and legislative framework for radiation protection; initiating scientific research into the 
behaviour and impact of radionuclides released into the environment - particularly research 
into the effects of low radiation doses on human health; mitigating the consequences of the 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 11 

Chernobyl disaster as far as possible; rehabilitating the affected territories; and monitoring the 
health of the populations concerned. 

29. Experts had calculated that the losses suffered by Belarus as a result of the Chernobyl 
accident amounted to US $235 billion, which was 32 times the size of its national budget 
in 1986. The contaminated areas represented one quarter of the country's surface area, and 
over 150 000 people had had to be rehoused, thus involuntarily becoming environmental 
refugees. In order to mitigate the accident's consequences on its territory, the Belarus 
Government had launched a wide-ranging programme funded from the national budget, but it 
relied heavily on the support of the international community. He was deeply grateful to all 
those people of goodwill, States, international organizations and social welfare bodies which 
had responded to the United Nations appeal by providing assistance to Belarus. 
30. The Agency too had committed itself actively to strengthening its co-operation with 
Belarus in the context of the interorganizational programme to provide international assistance 
to regions affected by the Chernobyl accident, particularly in the areas of strengthening 
radiation protection, radioactive waste management, rehabilitating agricultural and forest 
areas, and reducing the external dose commitment to the inhabitants of the contaminated 
areas. Belarus welcomed those initiatives and noted that its activities with the Agency under 
the Agency's technical assistance programme - one of its most dynamic programmes - were 
producing tangible results and exerting a positive impact on its development. The 
implementation in Belarus of a project for the production of lubricants from rapeseed grown 
on contaminated land was the first in a new generation of projects which were not only 
intended to decontaminate the land and solve other environmental problems, but also had a 
clear economic impact. Belarus was also satisfied with the implementation of the 
interregional Model Projects on "Upgrading Radiation Protection Infrastructure" and on 
"Upgrading Waste Management Infrastructure", which would add fresh momentum to the 
conclusion of bilateral agreements between States of the region. 
31. One of the main tasks undertaken by Belarus after its independence had been to 
establish a legal framework governing radiation protection and nuclear safety. In 
January 1998, two extremely important laws had come into force, one on radiation protection 
of the population and the other on export controls. In addition, the Belarus Parliament was 
currently examining a draft law on nuclear energy utilization and radiation safety which 
specified the procedures to be followed in order to ensure the safe use of ionizing radiation 
sources. 
32. The Belarus Government attached great importance to the elaboration of international 
legislation in the area of nuclear safety and radiation protection. In November 1997, the 
Belarus Parliament had ratified the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage, 
which had entered into force for Belarus in May 1998. In September 1998, Belarus had 
signed the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention, which it believed fully satisfied the 
wish of States to establish a worldwide liability regime for nuclear damage and also 
strengthened and complemented the mechanism for compensation for nuclear damage 
provided for in the Paris and Vienna Conventions. Belarus had also decided to accede to the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 12 

33. Belarus attached great importance to the strengthening of the international safeguards 
regime and to strict compliance with commitments undertaken for the protection of nuclear 
material. With the help of the Agency, the United States, Japan and Sweden, it had set up a 
State system of accounting for and control of nuclear material which met all the relevant 
international standards. The system enabled Belarus to play an active role in the Agency's 
programme to detect cases of illicit trafficking in nuclear material and radioactive sources and 
in its inspection activities, and allowed Belarus to exercise control over nuclear materials in 
transit through its territory. 
34. On the basis of the experience it had gained within the framework of its international 
commitments under the NPT, its safeguards agreement and the Convention on the Physical 
Protection of Nuclear Material, and since it had the necessary infrastructure and qualified 
personnel, Belarus proposed to set up a regional training centre for nuclear material 
accountancy, control and physical protection. It called on the Agency and all interested 
countries to support that initiative. 
35. Despite its difficult economic situation, made worse by the need to deal with the 
consequences of the Chernobyl disaster, the Belarus Government had managed to 
contribute $1.3 million to the Agency's Regular Budget for 1998. It had also made good its 
arrears of assessed programme costs for all previous years (1990-1997), had made a voluntary 
contribution to the TCF for 1998 of some $100 000, and would do everything in its power to 
meet its financial obligations to the Agency. In conclusion, the Belarus Government was 
satisfied with the work the Agency had done in 1997 and could approve the Agency's Annual 
Report for 1997 and the Regular Budget for 1999. 
36. Mr. RANA (Kenya) said that all Agency members had a duty to ensure that 
nuclear technology was used safely and peacefully for the purposes of sustainable 
development without compromising the well-being of future generations, and to address the 
new challenges arising from socio-economic and political developments that had an impact on 
nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation, on energy needs, particularly those of the 
developing countries, and on the environment. The Agency and its Member States should 
focus their efforts with even greater determination on the main areas of activity and endeavour 
to respond flexibly to the new challenges. 
37. Kenya was grateful to the Agency for the technical assistance it provided. Full and 
mutually advantageous co-operation between Kenya and the Agency remained of paramount 
importance to the Government and people of Kenya in tackling social and economic 
challenges. Kenya particularly appreciated the technical co-operation achievements in 
agriculture, health and industry, which were fully in line with the objectives of the United 
Nations Special Initiatives on Africa and confirmed that the Agency, guided by its Member 
States, strongly supported the efforts of developing countries, especially in Africa, to expedite 
technology transfer in order to achieve sustainable development. Kenya also welcomed the 
Agency's efforts to strengthen the effectiveness of its technical co-operation activities through 
the implementation of various policies and management concepts, such as Partners in 
Development, Country Programme Frameworks, Thematic Planning and Model Projects. 
Those initiatives had improved the cost-effectiveness of the technical co-operation programme 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 13 

in Kenya, and had helped ensure that projects were selected in accordance with the country's 
development needs. 

38. The Agency was also to be commended for its well-designed programmes aimed at 
promoting regional co-operation to increase the pace of nuclear technology transfer. Its 
support for regional groups, in particular AFRA, clearly demonstrated the Agency's visionary 
efforts to promote and strengthen regional co-operation and to address regional challenges. 
That approach, which recognized the differences in level of technological development among 
developing countries, could bring mutual benefits if applied to the maximum. The AFRA 
programme had helped establish strong ties of friendship and co-operation between countries 
of the region, so that a number were now becoming partners in development. Kenya hoped 
that the programme would receive further support, since the activities already carried out had 
proved vital in dealing with regional nuclear energy issues taking account of unique regional 
problems. The AFRA programme looked set to become a major tool for the future 
implementation of the Agency's technical co-operation activities. 
39. In the area of food and agriculture, nuclear techniques were being used to improve food 
security through mutation techniques, the maximization of plant productivity and preservation 
of the environment, with isotope and other nuclear techniques being used for water and soil 
management, to improve the diagnosis and control of livestock diseases, and to increase 
animal productivity. The Agency continued to contribute to the development of improved 
drought-resistant wheat varieties, and to the improvement of animal diets and animal health, 
all of which were important elements in the national food security programme. The 
Government was determined to eradicate the tsetse fly and trypanosomiasis from Kenya, and 
would give priority to the use of the sterile insect technique for tsetse fly control in areas 
where that technique showed promise. 
40. Over the past year, Kenya had continued to extend the application of non-destructive 
testing in its manufacturing industry, both for quality control purposes and in order to 
establish acceptable standards for its industrial goods. The Kenya Bureau of Standards 
continued to work with the International Organization for Standardization and other parties to 
set up an integrated national qualification and certification system for staff engaged in 
non-destructive testing. Kenya was extremely grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had 
provided. The technology was currently being used to determine the structural integrity of 
buildings and other structures damaged by the terrorist bomb attack of August 1998. Kenya 
thanked the governments and institutions which had helped it deal with the consequences of 
the attack, and appealed to the Agency to provide it with additional support in order to help 
ensure the safety of the rehabilitated structures. 
41. hi order to ensure the sustainable and effective application of nuclear technology in 
Kenya, the Government intended to provide the Institute of Nuclear Science at the University 
of Nairobi with the support it needed for adapting modern instrumentation and analytical 
techniques. In addition to providing support to other institutions for the maintenance of 
scientific instruments, training and analytical work in various fields of research and 
development, the Institute would also be involved in the application of radiation technology 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 14 

for environmental conservation purposes, including isotope applications for the monitoring of 
environmental pollution, radiotracer studies, and nuclear analytical techniques. 

42. Under its technical co-operation programme, the Agency had also helped upgrade 
Kenya's national health service, particularly in the area of diagnostic radiology and 
radiography. National liaison centres for diagnostic radiology and radiography currently 
provided end-users in the national health care system with the scientific and technical training 
they needed. The centres planned to widen the application of such techniques under a national 
project aimed at improving the diagnosis and treatment of cervical cancer, which affected 
many young women in Kenya and thus represented a particular health problem with 
consequences for all sectors of the population. The project would greatly assist the national 
health system in dealing with that problem. 
43. During the next programme cycle Kenya would be involved, in the framework of the 
AFRA programme, in a project on the application of isotope hydrology in the development 
and management of water resources. In terms of socio-economic development, it was 
expected to produce tangible results for a significant part of the population in the semi-arid 
north-eastern region of Kenya. Isotopes would be used to verify groundwater and aquifer 
dynamics through the use of numerical modelling procedures and calibrated models in order 
to establish a system on which to base decision-making for water resources management. 
Kenya was grateful to the Agency for including it in the project. 
44. The elaboration of a set of radiation safety standards and provisions had made a crucial 
contribution to ensuring the safety of nuclear technology applications in Member States. In 
that context, the promotion of radiation safety by the Radiation Protection Board had played a 
very important role in the effective application of nuclear technology in Kenya by ensuring 
that radiation sources were maintained, stored and used in accordance with adequate health 
and safety standards. Kenya was determined to comply with the safety standards. 
45. The Government's initiative to promote public awareness of the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy was well under way, with involvement of both the scientific community and public and 
private sector policy-makers. The objective of the campaign was to improve all the interested 
parties' understanding of the advantages of nuclear energy and its potential impact on national 
development. It was an important undertaking that would require close collaboration with the 
Agency. The Government therefore hoped to receive Agency support in obtaining financial 
and technical assistance. 
46. The Agency's safeguards system had been strengthened significantly to provide credible 
assurances not only with respect to declared nuclear activities but also with respect to the 
absence of clandestine nuclear activities. For the Kenyan Government, nuclear security in 
tomorrow's world required that safeguards be implemented in a clear, fair and transparent 
manner and that strong measures be taken in the event of non-compliance. Moreover, all 
safeguards measures adopted at the international level should be implemented in strict 
compliance with the legal framework comprising the Agency's Statute and relevant treaties. It 
was extremely important that all States should compile an inventory of their nuclear material. 
In that regard, Kenya called upon the Agency to take full account of the latest technical 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 15 

innovations in seeking to apply safeguards as effectively, efficiently and non-intrusively as 
possible. 

47. The environment in which the Agency operated had changed and long-term 
reorientation was needed to enable the Agency to tackle the challenges of the twenty-first 
century. It was vitally important to improve the mechanisms used in determining priorities 
among the various objectives and to strengthen activities using the available resources. In that 
connection, Kenya welcomed the initiatives that the Director General had taken since 
assuming office, particularly the internal management review, the external review of its 
operation and the review of the Agency's role in managing public information. 
48. hi conclusion, he thanked the Secretariat, in particular the Department of Technical 
Co-operation, for the work it had carried out. With regard to the staffing of the Secretariat, 
the Director General was to be commended on his efforts to increase the proportion of women 
professionals with a view to achieving the required balance. As to recruitment at the senior 
managerial and decision-making levels, due account should be taken of regional and 
subregional balance. 
49. Mr. HEATHCOTE (United Kingdom) said that over the past year significant 
progress had been made in implementing the strengthened safeguards system. The Secretariat 
had submitted to the Board for approval additional protocols pertaining to 32 States -a 
number of them with significant nuclear activities - and one regional organization. The 
United Kingdom was among that number, together with all its European Union partners. He 
was pleased to have signed the additional protocol in accordance with the clear undertaking he 
had given on behalf of the United Kingdom at a special meeting of the Board the previous 
year. The next step was to bring the agreements into force as soon as possible. Although the 
domestic legislative schedule might prevent it from bringing its additional protocol into force 
as rapidly as it would wish, his Government was already working with the national nuclear 
industry, EURATOM and the Agency to see what measures could be applied on a voluntary 
basis. The United Kingdom called on all States to follow its example by negotiating and 
bringing into force additional protocols with the Agency and making every effort to help the 
Agency establish a strengthened safeguards system as soon as possible, which in turn would 
enable it to optimize safeguards through the integration of new and old measures. 
50. In the field of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament, the past year had not, 
unfortunately, been one of entirely smooth progress. Nevertheless, as a depositary State, the 
United Kingdom welcomed Brazil's ratification of the NPT. In addition to negotiating its 
additional protocol, his country had also taken a number of other positive steps in that area. 
The United Kingdom and France had been the first nuclear-weapon States to ratify the CTBT 
on 6 April 1998 and, after completion of its strategic defence review, the United Kingdom had 
announced a reduction in the number of warheads to be carried by Trident submarines and a 
ceiling on the overall number of nuclear warheads. A further outcome of the same review and 
one which was more directly relevant to the Agency's work - was that large quantities of 
nuclear material would be placed under EURATOM safeguards and therefore liable to Agency 
inspection. More detailed explanations on that matter and other related measures were being 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 16 

made available to Member States as part of the United Kingdom's commitment to greater 
transparency. 

51. Having thus made tangible contributions to multilateral efforts in the areas of nuclear 
non-proliferation and disarmament, the United Kingdom had been particularly dismayed that 
India and Pakistan had chosen the opposite course in conducting their nuclear tests in May. 
The only effect of the tests had been to heighten tension and upset regional stability in South 
Asia, and they had rightly been widely condemned by the international community. The 
United Kingdom called on India and Pakistan to take the following measures as soon as 
possible: to sign and ratify the CTBT; to sign the NPT and submit their nuclear activities to 
Agency inspections; to undertake not to develop or deploy nuclear weapons or missiles 
capable of carrying such weapons; and to adopt national legislation on the control of nuclear 
exports and exports of missiles in line with the controls exercised by the Nuclear Suppliers 
Group and the Missile Technology Control Regime. 
52. The actions of India and Pakistan had once again highlighted the urgent need to 
conclude a fissile material cut-off treaty. The United Kingdom welcomed the fact that the two 
countries had joined in the international consensus which had led to the establishment of an 
ad hoc committee at the Conference on Disarmament, and called upon them to accept a 
moratorium on fissile material production in the meantime. The United Kingdom was 
committed to playing an active role in the negotiation of a treaty banning the production of 
fissile material, and the action it had taken as a result of its strategic defence review showed 
its willingness to undertake commitments and obligations of the kind that such a treaty would 
include. 
53. The situation in Iraq and the DPRK continued to cause concern. Like its European 
Union partners, the United Kingdom commended the Agency on its vital work of 
investigating Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme. The United Kingdom condemned Iraq's 
decision of 5 August to suspend its co-operation with UNSCOM and the Agency. By taking 
that decision, Iraq had placed itself in breach of its obligations under various United Nations 
Security Council resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding signed by the United 
Nations Secretary-General and Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister in February 1998. The United 
Kingdom called on Iraq to comply fully and immediately with all its obligations under the 
relevant Security Council resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding. The United 
Kingdom was also seriously concerned at the DPRK's continuing failure to co-operate with 
the Agency in implementing its safeguards agreement. It strongly urged the DPRK to respond 
to the repeated calls of the Agency's Member States by complying with its commitments 
under its safeguards agreement and co-operating as fully as possible with the Director 
General. 
54. The United Kingdom continued to support the Agency's role in promoting the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy and its efforts in the field of nuclear safety. It looked forward to 
participating in the first review meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety scheduled for April 1999, and thanked the Secretariat for the efforts it had 
made in support of the preparations for that meeting. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 17 

55. The safety of some nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe remained a concern. The 
United Kingdom had been pleased - in the framework of a larger programme of bilateral 
support - to provide extrabudgetary funds for specific Agency technical co-operation projects 
in that area. 
56. The United Kingdom continued to be a strong supporter of the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities as a whole. It was pleased to have been able to make an additional 
contribution to the TCF, which meant that it could once more say that it had paid 100% of its 
share of the target since the inception of the Fund. The Agency had made great efforts to 
improve the management of technical co-operation activities - for example, by introducing the 
technical co-operation strategy, Model Projects and Country Programme Frameworks - and all 
Member States should play their part by paying their contributions to the TCF and their share 
of assessed programme costs on time and in full. The United Kingdom strongly urged them to 
do so. 
57. In conclusion, he thanked the Director General for the personal efforts he had made in 
his first year to improve the management of all the Agency's activities. The United Kingdom 
looked forward to the results of the work done by the senior expert group and of the internal 
review being carried out by senior managers in the Agency. 
58. Mr. D'ESCATHA (France) welcomed Benin on its admission to the Agency and 
associated himself with the statement made by Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
59. With the Board's approval in May 1997 of the second part of Programme 93+2, it was 
important to make good the political commitments undertaken during that process. France 
and its European Union partners had spared no effort in negotiating successfully the additional 
protocols to safeguards agreements concluded by Member States of the European Union, and 
it took satisfaction in being about to sign the additional protocol to its safeguards agreement. 
Programme 93+2 could only be fully effective if applied by the vast majority of States. 
France therefore urged all States with a safeguards agreement to conclude an additional 
protocol as soon as possible. 
60. The outcome of the second session of the Preparatory Committee for the NPT Review 
Conference in 2000 had been burdened by deadlock over the Middle East question. It would 
be absolutely essential to overcome that problem before the Committee's next session if the 
latter was to produce a more substantial result that demonstrated the vitality of the Treaty and 
a strengthening of the review process prior to the Review Conference in 2000. France still 
believed strongly that the NPT was, and should remain, the cornerstone of the 
non-proliferation regime, of which the Agency's safeguard system was the essential 
instrument. In that context, France welcomed Brazil's accession to the NPT and 
congratulated it on having made an important commitment which strengthened the Treaty's 
universal nature at a crucial time for the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. 
61. The NPT and the non-proliferation regime were not immune to crisis. 
The recent nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan had illustrated that fact. 
Very concerned at those developments, France, which had immediately 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 18 

expressed its total disapproval, had nevertheless chosen to engage in a critical dialogue 
with the two countries in question -a dialogue that, in its view, should not lead 
to any weakening of the international non-proliferation regime. In that context, France 

welcomed the fact that India and Pakistan, as well as Israel, had agreed with the decision to 
establish, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament, an ad hoc committee to 
negotiate a treaty banning the production of fissile material for nuclear explosive devices. 
While acknowledging with satisfaction the moratorium on testing announced by India and 
Pakistan, France urged them to sign the CTBT without delay. 

62. The events in South Asia were not the only example of the obstacles being encountered 
in pursuit of non-proliferation objectives. The situation in the DPRK continued to arouse 
serious concern in that regard. The difficulties currently confronting KEDO could not justify 
in any way the DPRK's threat to resume its military programme, or the continual obstructions 
it placed in the way of the Agency's efforts to ensure implementation of its safeguards 
agreement. Iraq was another subject for concern after its decision to suspend its co-operation 
with UNSCOM and the Agency and to restrict the scope of the international inspectors' 
activities. That decision was completely unacceptable. Moreover, it clearly did nothing to 
help Iraqi interests at a time when the latest report of the Agency's Action Team hinted at the 
possibility of moving to ongoing monitoring and verification with regard to nuclear 
inspections. France urged Iraq to resume its co-operation with UNSCOM and the Agency 
without delay and to comply fully with its obligations. 
63. The CTBT, an instrument for monitoring non-proliferation which also contributed to 
nuclear disarmament, had been opened for signature two years previously. France had ratified 
it on 6 April 1998 at the same time as the United Kingdom, the two countries being the first of 
the five nuclear-weapon States to take that step. France was playing an active part in the work 
of the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization. 
It was making a very substantial contribution to the work of the Provisional Technical 
Secretariat responsible for setting up the Treaty's international verification system. No time 
should be wasted in advancing the entry into force of the CTBT and in making the 
international verification system operational. The positive statements of intent made by India 
and Pakistan concerning their accession to the CTBT should encourage the international 
community to sustain its efforts to achieve the Treaty's earliest possible entry into force. 
64. France's closure and dismantling of its testing centre in the Pacific was a clear 
indication of its commitment to the objectives of the CTBT. He did not wish to dwell on the 
subject, except to mention the conclusions of the International Advisory Committee appointed 
by the Agency, at the request of the French Government, to assess the radiological situation on 
the Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls. France noted with satisfaction that those conclusions 
confirmed the French authorities' repeated assertions that the tests had been conducted with 
all the necessary precautions in order to ensure that there were no short-term or long-term 
radiological consequences for public health and the environment. France thanked the 
Chairman of the International Advisory Committee, Ms. Gail de Planque, the chairmen of the 
study groups, and all the experts from the participating countries and laboratories, for their 
contributions to the success of the study. It also thanked the Agency's Secretariat for having 
taken on the management of the project and the organization of the international scientific 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 19 

conference which had discussed the Committee's conclusions. Finally, France was also 
grateful to Mr. Bobadilla Lopez, Chairman of the Chilean Atomic Energy Commission, for his 
skilful chairmanship of that conference. 

65. France welcomed the start of negotiations on a treaty for the prohibition of fissile 
material for explosive devices as it had worked hard to that end. The treaty would have to be 
universal, non-discriminatory, and verifiable on an effective international basis. For its part, 
France had taken the unilateral decision to halt its production of fissile material for explosive 
devices, in 1993 in the case of plutonium, and in June 1996 in the case of highly enriched 
uranium. France welcomed the fact that other nuclear-weapon States had taken similar 
decisions and, for its part, had decided to go one step further by dismantling its facilities for 
producing such material - a process that was already under way. 
66. The promotion of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy was inseparable from 
non-proliferation and, like the latter, an essential objective of the Agency's activities. The 
Kyoto Conference had highlighted the difficulty, in the context of sustainable development, of 
reconciling growth in energy demand with limitations on greenhouse gas emissions. France 
believed strongly that nuclear energy could and should contribute to economic development 
and the well-being of mankind while also respecting the environment. 
67. Safety enhancement was an objective shared by all States. In April 1999, the 
Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety would be holding their first review 
meeting. France was preparing actively for that meeting, which should take initiatives to 
promote a safety culture with greater worldwide acceptance. However, that should only be the 
first stage. The Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety 
of Radioactive Waste Management, which had been adopted in September 1997 and was an 
indispensable complement to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, had not yet entered into 
force. The international community must spare no effort in bringing it into force at the 
earliest opportunity. 
68. The Contracting Parties to the Paris Convention had decided to review the Convention 
in order to bring some of its provisions into line with the Vienna Convention. France placed 
great value on a broadening of the nuclear civil liability system as a means of ensuring both 
the protection of potential victims and the legal security of French industrialists operating in 
that field. France called on all States to sign and ratify the revised Vienna Convention. 
69. Despite the Agency's increased responsibilities, resulting in greater costs, the draft 
budget proposed by the Board for 1999 showed a slight decrease in real growth. While it 
shared the concern for strict budgetary control, the French delegation believed that zero 
growth constituted neither a principle nor a dogma, and that the Agency should be given a 
budget that allowed it to accomplish its essential missions effectively. In that regard, it was as 
well to be aware of the perverse effect induced by the constraint of zero growth. It forced the 
Agency increasingly to seek extrabudgetary funding, an expedient which undermined Member 
States' powers of control and made the Agency overdependent on resources that came from 
the donors with strings attached. The French delegation continued to think that, in the light of 
the great efforts made to improve management and effectiveness, it was now time to make a 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 20 

deliberate move towards a policy of rational programme selection. He looked forward with 
interest to the recommendations of the group of experts convened by the Director General. 

70. Those comments also applied to the Agency's technical assistance and co-operation 
activities. France commended the Secretariat on its efforts to improve their implementation. 
However, it was concerned about the discrepancy which had been noted for a number of years 
between the target set for the TCF - perhaps an overambitious one - and the level of voluntary 
contributions actually paid. In the absence of any rational selection, overprogramrning beyond 
the normal limit appropriate to cover implementation uncertainties was an easy way out that 
penalized States like France which paid their share of the Fund in full. The practice should 
therefore be discontinued. 
71. Among the more significant events which had taken place in France over the past year, 
the total capacity of France's 57 PWRs had reached 61 GW(e) at the end of December 1997, 
representing 78% of national electricity production. The availability of the 54 PWRs of the 
900 and 1300 MW(e) types remained satisfactory (around 83%). Reactor safety in 1997 had 
also remained at a satisfactory level. The first three units of the 1450 MW(e) series 
(Chooz Bl and B2, Civaux 1) had been connected to the grid, and the startup of the last one 
(Civaux 2) was scheduled for 1999. An incident classified at level 2 on the INES scale had 
occurred at Civaux 1 in May. The cause had been thermal fatigue affecting part of the 
shutdown reactor cooling system. The incident had led to the shutdown for repair of the three 
units. 
72. On 2 February 1998 the French Government had outlined France's overall energy 
policy. The nuclear option had been retained, with greater emphasis being placed on efficient 
energy management and the use of renewable energy sources. The objective of the policy was 
to keep the nuclear option open until the year 2010, which would see the end of the expected 
lifetime of the oldest power plants. In addition, particular attention would be paid to quality 
control and transparency in the nuclear industry, and to the independence and diversity of 
expertise in the area of safety and radiation protection. The abandonment of the Superphenix 
reactor did not call into question research on fast neutrons, particularly the work on 
transmutation provided for under the law of 30 December 1991 concerning the management 
of long-lived waste. That work was continuing, with the Phenix reactor, which had resumed 
power operation in late May 1998, being used as the main irradiation facility. International 
co-operation was also playing a part. 
73. With regard to the front end of the nuclear fuel cycle, at the end of 1997 research had 
demonstrated the technical feasibility of the laser uranium isotope separation process (SILVA) 
and an initial economic assessment of the process had also been produced. The MELOX 
MOX fuel fabrication plant had reached its rated capacity of 115 tonnes per year in 1997. 
With regard to reprocessing, the La Hague plant had operated at full capacity (over 
1600 tonnes per year). The management of high-level long-lived waste was one of the major 
issues affecting the future of nuclear power. Accordingly, France had stepped up its research 
efforts in the three areas specified under the Law of 30 December 1991: separation and 
transmutation of long-lived radionuclides, investigations into storage in deep geological 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 21 

formations, and study of long-term conditioning and storage processes in surface or 
subsurface facilities. 

74. In conclusion, he was convinced that in the decades to come nuclear energy would play 
a vital role in meeting world energy demand. When well managed, nuclear power satisfied all 
the requirements with regard to safety, supply and cost-effectiveness, and was 
environmentally friendly. France's contribution to the Agency's activities was based on those 
concerns, and it reiterated its support for the Agency's objectives and its intention to continue 
participating actively in the Agency's activities. 
75. Mr. KO (Myanmar), after welcoming Benin, said that the Agency performed a 
vital role in areas such as non-proliferation, safeguards, radiation safety, and especially the 
various nuclear technical applications which advanced the well-being of mankind. 
76. As a result of the Agency's technical co-operation programme, Myanmar now had 
access to the benefits of nuclear medicine and radiotherapy, as well as nuclear techniques used 
in medical research. The Agency's assistance, especially in terms of equipment and the 
training of specialists, was still vitally important in ensuring that such advanced services 
continued to operate under satisfactory conditions. The technical co-operation programme 
also extended to other areas such as agriculture, radiation protection, nuclear analytical 
techniques and nuclear applications in industry, hi particular, the use of radiation sources in 
industry had made great strides during 1997 and 1998 - an indication of the progress Myanmar 
had made. The licensing and inspection of radiation sources required a suitable radiation 
protection infrastructure, and in that connection Myanmar was receiving Agency assistance 
through the interregional Model Projects on upgrading radiation protection and on waste 
management infrastructure. 
77. Myanmar was highly committed to the development of science and technology, and 
placed particular emphasis on training young people. It had opened additional technological 
institutes and universities, and was trying to improve the level of the education provided for 
engineers and scientists - thus, in 1997 courses at master's and doctorate level had been set up 
in a large number of subjects. Nuclear science and technology were well represented, thanks 
to the Agency's programme of human resources development and nuclear technology support. 
78. Nevertheless, as a developing country, Myanmar still had only limited scientific and 
technological resources, and there were a number of areas - such as radiosterilization, isotope 
production and the use of nuclear techniques in hydrology - in which nothing could be 
achieved without the Agency's assistance. He was well aware that his country was not the 
only one in need of such assistance and the Secretariat and the Director General should 
examine the particular needs of developing Member States and seek ways and means of 
assisting them. The Agency's technical assistance programme should give particular priority 
to projects intended for the least developed countries. 
79. Myanmar had signed the Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-Free Zone. It 
would like to see not only its region, but the whole world, rid itself entirely of nuclear 
weapons, and it would continue to participate actively in the international community's efforts 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 22 

to achieve that objective. Lastly, he thanked the new Director General for his endeavours and 
expressed the hope that the Agency would be able to continue working successfully in the 
interests of worldwide peace, health and prosperity. 

80. Mr. MARTIN (Holy See) recalled that one of the main reasons why the Holy See 
had become an Agency member was to encourage initiatives aimed at the biblical vision of 
"turning swords into ploughshares" and to work with all men and women of goodwill who 
aspired to the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. It called upon all Heads of State to 
put an end to nuclear tests and arms production, to reduce stocks, and to transfer the resulting 
nuclear material to peaceful activities so as to rule out any further risk of a nuclear arms race. 
Although some progress had been made in that direction, the NPT having been extended 
indefinitely and the large majority of States having signed the CTBT, there was an urgent need 
for all States to ratify those treaties immediately and unconditionally, and for nuclear-weapon 
States to work harder at reducing their nuclear arsenals, with the aim of eliminating them in 
accordance with Article VI of the NPT. The banning of tests, disarmament and 
non-proliferation were closely linked and should be implemented as soon as possible under 
effective international controls. 
81. Experience had shown that there were those who were tempted to turn ploughshares into 
swords, and it was therefore necessary to strengthen political will by means of effective 
verification devices and to reject firmly and universally everything that might encourage a 
renewed threat of nuclear war, as Pope John Paul II had emphasized at the fiftieth session of 
the United Nations General Assembly in 1995. As an indication of its political commitment, 
the Holy See was about to sign an additional protocol, with the aim of contributing to greater 
transparency. A more efficient verification system would allow States to demonstrate the 
peaceful nature of their nuclear activities and to feel more confident about the loyalty of other 
States. That in turn would facilitate initiatives to reduce the number of nuclear weapons or to 
eliminate them. 
82. One of the Agency's main tasks was to ensure that nuclear energy was used peacefully 
and safely. Without doubt, safety remained one of the greatest challenges and, appreciating 
the need to achieve harmonized minimum safety standards in every country, the Holy See 
welcomed and followed with interest the Agency's initiatives to establish a worldwide safety 
culture through the conclusion of binding international agreements, the adoption of 
non-binding safety standards and the provision of safety services. In that regard, considerable 
progress had been made in recent years with the adoption of the Conventions on Early 
Notification of a Nuclear Accident, on Assistance in Case of a Nuclear Accident or 
Radiological Emergency, on Nuclear Safety, and the Joint Conventions on the Safety of Spent 
Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, and with the revision 
of the international civil liability regime. Standards still had to be established in other areas 
such as the transport of nuclear material, radiation protection and illicit trafficking in nuclear 
material. However, the paramount consideration was to ensure that those standards and 
guidelines were implemented. 
83. The exchange of experience in a large number of areas, ranging from power plant design 
and operation to decommissioning and radioactive waste management, was a precious 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 23 

learning resource. Close and urgent attention should be given to the study of techniques and 
methods for storing nuclear waste in ways that protected present and future generations. 
Nuclear energy was mankind's common inheritance, and the risks involved in its peaceful 
utilization should encourage the international community to ensure that it was properly 
controlled and managed and to promote co-operation aimed at securing the highest 
international safety standards. 

84. With regard to development issues, the international community continued to express its 
concern about environmental degradation and to advocate the need for truly sustainable 
development. There were certainly many applications of nuclear techniques which could help, 
especially in developing countries, to facilitate or promote sustainable development through 
research programmes and projects in areas such as nutrition, the preservation of soil fertility, 
pest control, and the provision of potable water. In the case of commercial energy production, 
impartial and objective evaluation was still required in order to strike a balance between 
nuclear energy's potential contribution to the rapid and consistent reduction of carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gases and the long-term risks it presented. 
85. The Holy See did not feel competent to propose or pronounce on particular technical 
solutions, but it did believe that scientific and technical progress should be placed at the 
service of all peoples and all countries, especially the less privileged. The fact that all regions 
of the world were moving closer together in economic terms should not lead to the 
globalization of poverty, but to a globalization of solidarity. In that regard, sharing of the 
technology needed for human and social development had a very important role to play. In 
conclusion, he thanked the Director General and the Secretariat whose competence and 
perseverance contributed to the progress, safety and peace of mankind. 
86. Mr. SUBKI (Indonesia), welcoming Benin on its admission to the Agency, said 
that in his opening remarks the Director General had rightly emphasized the progress that had 
been made by the Agency over the past year and the need to achieve even greater efficiency. 
The Agency was increasing its contribution at the heart of the United Nations in the quest for 
sustainable development, and had succeeded in further strengthening the international legal 
framework for ensuring that nuclear energy was used safely and for solely peaceful purposes. 
87. Another reason for satisfaction over the past year had been the adoption of the rules of 
procedure, financial regulations and guidelines for the preparation of national reports ahead of 
the first meeting of the Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety to be held 
in 1999. The Agency had also organized diplomatic conferences to adopt the Joint 
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste 
Management, the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention, and the Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage. 
88. The Agency's technical co-operation activities were comprehensively described in 
document GC(42)/INF/4. Indonesia supported the initiatives taken by the Agency to 
strengthen its technical co-operation programmes through restructuring and management 
reorganization. As a result, there would be a broader operational base for activities, so that 
the Department of Technical Co-operation, in the context of a new partnership, would be able 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 24 

to plan and prioritize more accurately. The new approach would ensure improved 
management continuity and programme follow-up, and better use of human resources. 

89. In response to the severe economic and monetary crisis confronting Indonesia, the 
National Atomic Energy Agency (BATAN) had launched an emergency programme aimed at 
solving attendant technical problems, especially in food production in some parts of the 
country, by means of accelerated application of nuclear technology. Co-operating closely with 
universities and various public institutions and with the Agency's unfailing support, BAT AN 
had set up a project in which urea molasses multinutrient blocks were used as feed 
supplements to increase meat production and had introduced RIA techniques, as part of an 
effort to overcome Indonesia's shortage of basic food products. Subsequently, the 
Government had given 2400 head of improved breeds of cattle to participating fanners. 
Lastly, BAT AN had introduced a new mutant rice variety known as "Cilosari". 
90. His Government was still convinced that nuclear power was one of the most promising 
energy alternatives in the medium and long term, and BAT AN would continue to prepare the 
planning and decision-making structures for Indonesia's nuclear power programme. At the 
same time, Indonesia was following with interest the progress of high-temperature reactor 
technology for application in industry and in potable water production. Indonesia invited all 
Member States and the Agency to continue their co-operation on the development of that 
technology. 
91. Strengthening the effectiveness and improving the efficiency of the Agency's safeguards 
system was in keeping with worldwide nuclear non-proliferation objectives. His Government 
therefore welcomed the Board's approval in 1997 of the Model Additional Protocol. It was 
ready to sign such a protocol as a complement to its comprehensive safeguards agreement 
with the Agency. The existence of the Model Protocol was of the utmost importance, as it 
would not only strengthen the safeguards system, but also provide the Agency with a legal 
tool which would enhance its ability to detect undeclared nuclear material and activities, hi 
that context, he thanked the Agency for the considerable efforts it had made to provide 
Indonesia with the equipment and technology it needed for the application of safeguards. 
92. The Agency's efforts to strengthen the international nuclear safety regime were of great 
importance. Major progress had been achieved through the adoption of a series of instruments 
for improving nuclear and radiation safety and the safety of waste management, namely the 
Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive 
Waste Management, the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention, and the Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, all of which the Indonesian Government 
had signed. Moreover, as a contribution to the safety culture which needed to be implemented 
worldwide, his Government had recently enacted a law on nuclear safety that covered, 
inter alia, the establishment of a regulatory body, the Nuclear Energy Control Board. Set up in 
May 1998, the Board exercised powers of regulation, licensing and control for all nuclear 
energy applications. Lastly, co-operation among ASEAN countries in the areas of nuclear 
safety and waste management was now under way. Among the main concerns would be the 
prevention of illicit trafficking in nuclear material, planning for regional emergencies, and 
research and development in nuclear safety. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 25 

93. His delegation regretted the fact that after so many years of discussion and negotiation 
the Board had not yet managed to reach agreement on the amendment of Article VI of the 
Statute. However, he thanked the outgoing Chairman of the Board, Ambassador Ikeda, for the 
painstaking effort and dedication he had shown over the past year in guiding the discussions 
on that delicate issue. Despite the difficulties which had prevented a consensus being reached 
on the outstanding issues concerning Board expansion and the composition of regional 
groups, the Indonesian delegation strongly hoped that the General Conference would arrive at 
a compromise that would facilitate the discussions to come and would enable a solution to be 
reached in the near future that was acceptable to all. 
94. Indonesia had benefited from the wide spectrum of programmes implemented under the 
auspices of the RCA since its inception. Those programmes, together with the bilateral 
technical co-operation activities carried out by the Agency, had made a great contribution to 
manpower training and scientific and technological development, which had been 
instrumental in solving a number of problems in agriculture, health, industrial development 
and environmental protection. Indonesia was keen to promote technical co-operation among 
developing countries, and would continue to be a party to the RCA for the next five years. 
In 1997, on the occasion of the Agreement's twenty-fifth anniversary, the Indonesian 
delegation had submitted a paper on the RCA's prospects for the next 25 years, describing the 
main steps to be taken to achieve the Agreement's objectives. The time had come to assess 
the RCA's performance and to consider new directions so that it would continue to respond 
appropriately to the increasingly complex socio-economic and technological demands of the 
region of Asia and the Pacific. In conclusion, he reiterated his Government's commitment to 
the Agency's programmes, particularly those which benefited the developing countries. 
Mr. Codorni Pujals (Cuba) took the Chair. 

95. Mr. DUBOIS (Canada), having welcomed Benin's admission to the Agency, noted 
with satisfaction that, in order to facilitate the review of the Agency's future activities in a 
world that was rapidly changing, the Director General had taken the initiative of establishing a 
senior expert group to review the future directions of the Agency's programme and its overall 
priorities. He looked forward to receiving the expert group's conclusions and 
recommendations. With other States, Canada was ready to ensure that the Agency remained a 
highly efficient international organization in a good position to meet future challenges. 
96. The Agency was continuing its work in the key sectors of non-proliferation, nuclear 
safety and technical co-operation in order to increase the contribution of nuclear energy to 
peace, health and prosperity throughout the world. However, 1998 had been marked by 
several events which ran counter to the efforts that were being made to promote the peaceful 
use of nuclear energy. It was likely that public opinion, particularly with regard to nuclear 
non-proliferation, safety and radioactive waste management, would continue to influence the 
future use of nuclear energy. Since the Agency was the main instrument for the elaboration of 
international law and the main guide in those key areas, the public should be kept regularly 
informed about its activities. In that respect, the ongoing review by the Agency of the role and 
management of public information was particularly useful, as well as the development of its 
Internet site and the production of the film entitled "The Nuclear Age". The Director 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 26 

General's suggestion to set up an expanded programme of public information seminars was 
also extremely interesting. 

97. In playing its crucial role in the fight against the proliferation of nuclear weapons, the 
Agency's main objective had always been to verify, through its safeguards system, the 
compliance by States with the commitments they had made to use nuclear energy for peaceful 
purposes. During the present session, Canada would sign an additional protocol to the 
safeguards agreement which it had concluded with the Agency and he was pleased to see that 
several other States intended to do likewise. All Member States should conclude and 
implement such protocols as soon as possible, hi applying the strengthened safeguards 
system, the Agency should first try to make it more effective and more efficient by integrating 
the traditional measures and the new measures. It should also establish priorities and 
concentrate its efforts on the most important aspects of the prevention of proliferation. In 
addition, national statements on the Agency's safeguards activities in the country concerned 
should be prepared in a systematic and transparent manner. 
98. During the past few years, the Agency had been asked to consider stepping up its 
verification activities in areas such as illicit trafficking in nuclear material and other 
radioactive sources, weapons-grade fissile material deemed to be surplus to requirements in 
nuclear-weapon States, and the possible signature of agreements prohibiting the production of 
fissile material for nuclear-weapons purposes. Member States should consider how the 
Agency could tackle those activities and how they could be financed. 
99. The nuclear-weapons tests which India and then Pakistan had carried out in violation of 
international regulations had cast a shadow over the progress that had been achieved and the 
efforts made by the whole international community. Moreover, the lack of progress in the 
Preparatory Committee for the 2000 NPT Review Conference was also a source of concern. 
Canada urged all Member States to abide by the general principles of nuclear 
non-proliferation and to ratify unconditionally the NPT and the CTBT. It also encouraged 
them to participate actively in the negotiation of a treaty banning the production of fissile 
material for the production of nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices within the 
framework of the United Nations Conference on Disarmament. 
100. The Agency was also called upon to play a vital role in the area of nuclear safety. He 
was pleased to see that a large number of Member States had ratified the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety and were in the process of transmitting their national reports on the measures 
taken by them to fulfil their obligations under that Convention; Canada had just completed 
the preparation of its report. The first review meeting, which would take place in April 1999, 
would be a landmark for the promotion of nuclear safety and he was sure that all the 
Contracting Parties would participate in the meeting in a constructive manner. Canada hoped 
that all countries, particularly those which had nuclear power programmes, would become 
parties to the Convention. 
101. In May 1998, Canada had ratified the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel 
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management and hoped that all Member 
States would soon do the same. It was participating actively in the implementation of that 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 27 

Convention, particularly in the preparation of the first meeting of the States Parties in 1999. 
At the same time, work was progressing on the safe transport of radioactive material; Canada 
had participated from the outset in the preparation and improvement of the Agency's 
Transport Regulations and had, on its own initiative, conformed to them by promulgating 
national regulations: it hoped that all Member States would do the same. 

102. Canada regarded the nuclear power option as a safe, environmentally sound and 
cost-effective source of energy and an attractive option for inclusion in the energy strategies of 
many States. Seven Canadian nuclear reactors had been temporarily shut down in order to 
facilitate the necessary work to improve the operator's management of the overall nuclear 
programme. Canada recognized the importance of effective management of all aspects of 
operational safety. That was one of the issues which had been addressed during the recent 
International Conference on Topical Issues in Nuclear, Radiation and Radioactive Waste 
Safety. The Agency should take the recommendations of that conference into account and 
provide, on a priority basis, guidance in the area of safety management. 
103. Some States required technical information and data in order to compare the costs and 
benefits of different energy sources so as to improve the overall effectiveness of their national 
energy programmes. Such a comparison was a complex issue which required expertise 
beyond the Agency's purview. It would be useful for the Agency to provide information 
within its field of expertise, but organizations dealing with broader energy problems should 
play a greater role in conducting comparative studies. Canada particularly appreciated and 
attached priority to the activities of the International Working Group on Heavy-Water 
Reactors and expected to continue to participate in, and benefit from, the work of that group 
for many years to come. The Agency's activities related to new uses of nuclear power for 
cogeneration and heat applications, including nuclear desalination of sea water, were of great 
interest to Canada, which fully supported the establishment of the International Working 
Group on Nuclear Fuel Cycle Options. 
104. Technical co-operation activities which assisted Member States, and particularly 
developing Member States, to master the peaceful uses of nuclear energy were very useful and 
should be continued. In particular, Canada endorsed the Agency's recent initiatives with 
regard to the concept of Partners in Development, performance-based management and 
country planning. Furthermore, it contributed regularly to the TCF, had a tradition of hosting 
interregional courses on nuclear safety, provided fellowship training and made available the 
services of Canadian experts. The Agency excelled in the transfer of nuclear applications, but 
it could benefit even more from closer co-operation, if not formal partnerships, with 
international organizations that had development experience in the field in order to ensure the 
sustainability of projects. The Agency had apparently established ties with the UNDP, WFP, 
UNICEF, WHO and other international organizations or financial institutions; it should work 
increasingly closely with such organizations. Inter-agency co-operation could promote 
financing possibilities for the Agency's technical co-operation programme and enhance 
programming effectiveness. It would also be desirable to see a broader base of donors to 
the TCF. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 28 

105. Canada welcomed the review of internal management which was being carried out by 
the Agency and, in particular, supported the establishment of the new Programme 
Co-ordination Committee responsible for harmonizing all programmes and resources and 
focusing on sectors that were identified as priorities. Canada regarded the establishment of 
priorities as essential and continued to advocate zero nominal growth for the budgets of all 
international organizations. Programmes should be conducted in the most effective and 
efficient way possible and he noted with satisfaction that others, also within the Agency, were 
adopting that position too. The knowledge that resources were not increasing should 
encourage the objective evaluation of programmes and efforts to ensure that sufficient 
resources were allocated to programmes that reflected the interests of the majority of Member 
States. The Agency was seeking ways of improving effectiveness and of making savings and 
should continue to remain vigilant in that respect. At the same time, Canada recognized that 
the Agency was being called upon to undertake additional tasks, particularly in the area of 
verification, and that some of those activities were currently financed by extrabudgetary 
resources. Member States should carefully assess the budgetary and programme implications 
of any proposed additional activities. 
106. Canada looked forward to co-operating with the Secretariat and other Member States in 
examining the Agency's priorities at the present crucial point in its history. It would continue 
to participate actively in the efforts made under the auspices of the Agency to make the 
nuclear power option available to Member States which considered that that technology was 
suitable for their energy or sustainable development programmes. It was clear that the main 
priority was to ensure that nuclear energy was used safely for peaceful purposes. Canada was 
firmly convinced that the proliferation of nuclear weapons could serve no country's security. 
The international community should always work in a spirit of co-operation to ensure that the 
Agency could continue to contribute to the international regime for the non-proliferation of 
nuclear weapons and work towards the more distant objective of nuclear disarmament. 
107. Mr. HGBERG (Sweden), having welcomed Benin to the Agency, associated 
himself with the statement made by Austria on behalf of the European Union and said that he 
would only highlight a few areas of special importance to his country. 
108. In May, India and Pakistan had blatantly shown their nuclear ambitions by conducting 
several nuclear tests. Those tests constituted a grave threat to international peace and security 
and to peace and stability in the region. Furthermore, they undermined efforts towards nuclear 
non-proliferation and disarmament in general. His delegation therefore urged India and 
Pakistan, and all other States that had not yet done so, to accede without delay and without 
conditions to the NPT and CTBT. It was essential to give new impetus to international efforts 
aimed at nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation. The Swedish Minister for Foreign 
Affairs and her counterparts from Brazil, Egypt, Ireland, Mexico, New Zealand, Slovenia and 
South Africa had issued a joint ministerial declaration on 9 June 1998 entitled "Towards a 
nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda". In that declaration, the Ministers 
urged nuclear-weapon States and the three States with nuclear weapons capability which had 
not acceded to the NPT to take the fundamental and requisite step of making a clear 
commitment to the speedy, final and total elimination of their nuclear weapons and 

GC(42)/ OR.4 
page 29 

nuclear-weapons 
capability. 
They 
stressed 
the 
need 
to 
draw 
up 
a 
new 
international 
agenda 
to 
establish 
a 
nuclear-weapon-fre 
eeworld 
through 
a 
series 
of 
complementary 
activities 
undertaken 
in 
parallel 
by 
nuclear-weapon 
States 
among 
themselves 
and 
by 
those 
States 
together 
with 
non-nuclear-weapon 
States 
to 
move 
towards 
that 
objective. 
The 
eight 
signatory 
Statesofthatdeclarationintendedtosubmitadraft 
resolutiontotheUnitedNationsGeneral 
Assembly 
based 
on 
that 
declaration 
and 
he 
hoped 
that 
it 
would 
be 
adopted 
by 
an 
overwhelming 
majority. 


109. 
TheConventiononNuclearSafetyandtheJointConventionontheSafetyofSpentFuel 
Management 
and 
on 
the 
Safety 
of 
Radioactive 
Waste 
Management 
were 
cornerstones 
of 
an 
international 
nuclear 
safety 
regime. 
Sweden 
therefore 
urged 
all 
Member 
States, 
particularly 
those 
with 
operating 
nuclear 
power 
plants, 
to 
accede 
as 
soon 
as 
possible 
to 
the 
two 
Conventions 
in 
order 
to 
make 
them 
truly 
universal. 
110. 
Sweden 
was 
looking 
forward 
to 
the 
first 
review 
meeting 
in 
1999 
under 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety. 
It 
hoped 
that 
the 
review 
process 
would 
be 
frank 
and 
constructive, 
in 
line 
with 
the 
spirit 
of 
the 
Convention, 
and 
that 
it 
would 
lead 
to 
a 
firm 
commitment 
from 
each 
Contracting 
Party 
to 
work 
on 
safety 
improvements 
wherever 
necessary. 
Sweden 
also 
believed 
that 
public 
confidence 
in 
nuclear 
safety 
would 
be 
improved 
if 
each 
Contracting 
Party 
publisheditsnationalreporttogetherwiththeconclusionsaboutitsnationalsafety 
programme 
drawn 
from 
the 
outcome 
of 
the 
review 
process, 
hi 
that 
context, 
Sweden 
was 
convinced 
that 
the 
Agency 
had 
a 
vital 
role 
to 
play 
in 
the 
areas 
of 
nuclear 
safety 
and 
radioactive 
waste 
safety. 
Through 
its 
various 
safety 
programmes 
and 
initiatives, 
the 
Agency 
could 
exert 
an 
indirect, 
but 
nevertheless 
important, 
influence 
on 
the 
development 
of 
the 
international 
safety 
regime 
under 
the 
framework 
of 
the 
two 
conventions. 
Sweden 
had 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
Agency's 
International 
Conference 
on 
Topical 
Issues 
in 
Nuclear, 
Radiation 
and 
Radioactive 
Waste 
Safety 
had 
provided 
valuable 
guidance 
on 
future 
Agency 
activities 
in 
important 
areas 
such 
as 
the 
management 
of 
operational 
safety, 
the 
problems 
posed 
by 
ageing 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
and 
options 
for 
the 
disposal 
of 
spent 
fuel 
and 
high-level 
waste. 
111. 
In 
view 
of 
the 
importance 
it 
attached 
to 
the 
Agency's 
technical 
co-operation 
activities, 
he 
was 
pleased 
to 
announce 
that 
Sweden 
had 
pledged 
its 
full 
share 
of 
the 
target 
of 
the 
TCF 
for 
1999. 
Sweden 
supported 
and 
appreciated 
the 
Agency's 
efforts 
to 
co-ordinate 
its 
activities 
with 
bilateral 
co-operation 
in 
areas 
of 
mutual 
interest 
such 
as 
nuclear 
safety, 
radiation 
protection 
and 
national 
nuclear 
material 
accounting 
and 
control 
systems. 
112. 
Mr. 
GREGORIC 
(Slovenia), 
having 
welcomed 
Benin 
as 
a 
new 
member 
of 
the 
Agency, 
said 
that 
he 
fully 
supported 
the 
statement 
made 
on 
behalf 
of 
the 
European 
Union 
by 
the 
delegate 
of 
Austria. 
113. 
Slovenia 
attached 
particular 
importance 
to 
the 
implementation 
stage 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
Nuclear 
Safety 
and 
had 
submitted 
its 
national 
report 
to 
the 
Secretariat 
during 
the 
present 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference. 
It 
noted 
with 
satisfaction 
that 
the 
Joint 
Convention 
on 
the 
Safety 
of 
Spent 
Fuel 
Management 
and 
on 
the 
Safety 
of 
Radioactive 
Waste 
Management 
was 
gradually 
moving 
towards 
entry 
into 
force. 
As 
far 
as 
Slovenia 
was 
concerned, 
the 
ratification 
process 
was 
expected 
to 
be 
completed 
before 
the 
end 
of 
the 
year. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 30 


114. Turning to the issue of nuclear non-proliferation, he noted that the NPT and the 
Agency's safeguards agreements continued to be of paramount importance for the 
international community. Slovenia highly appreciated and supported the Agency's work to 
strengthen its safeguards system through the adoption of additional protocols to safeguards 
agreements concluded pursuant to the NPT and firmly believed that such protocols could help 
to increase the Agency's capability to detect undeclared nuclear activities. His Government 
had decided to sign an additional protocol to the safeguards agreement concluded with the 
Agency and the protocol would be considered by the Slovenian Parliament before the end 
of 1998. Slovenia welcomed the substantial progress made with respect to the CTBT, which 
it would like to see enter into force as soon as possible. Furthermore, it encouraged the 
elaboration, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament, of a treaty banning the 
production of fissile material for nuclear-weapon purposes. Effective plans and strategies 
should also be established to deal with illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other 
radioactive sources - an area in which Slovenia intended to continue its co-operation with the 
Agency's Secretariat. 
115. Slovenia could only condemn and deplore the nuclear tests conducted by India and 
Pakistan and it remained firmly convinced that world peace and security called for determined 
and rapid preparation for the post-nuclear era. 
116. His delegation had carefully studied the Annual Report for 1997 and was pleased with 
the level of work done during that period in the various fields of Agency activity. It 
welcomed in particular the progress made in 1997 in implementing initiatives to improve the 
effectiveness of the technical co-operation programme. It commended the Secretariat, and in 
particular the Department of Technical Co-operation, on the implementation rate achieved. 
The experience gained during the two-year programming cycles confirmed the usefuhiess of 
the concept of Model Projects and the increased emphasis on end-users. Slovenia attached 
great importance to the technical co-operation programme, of which it was not only a 
beneficiary, but to which it also contributed through the organization of various regional and 
interregional courses and workshops and by hosting fellowships and scientific visits. It 
intended to expand and increase its activities in that area so that the Jozef Stefan Institute 
could serve as a centre of excellence. Slovenia also believed that the Agency's work in the 
area of nuclear, radiation and waste safety was essential and should be further enhanced in the 
future. 
117. All Member States should bear in mind that further efforts needed to be made to achieve 
additional savings without affecting the Agency's ability to meet its programme objectives. 
The Agency had already demonstrated transparency in that area and he was sure that the 
Director General would continue to move in the same direction. Member States should take 
part in those efforts. Prompt payment of assessed contributions would help to improve the 
Agency's financial situation and ensure a greater degree of implementation. Slovenia was in 
the process of effecting budgetary reforms in order to improve its financial situation. In the 
light of the importance that it attached to the Agency and despite Slovenia's strict budgetary 
constraints, Slovenia would continue to support co-operation with the Agency. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 31 


118. Mr. PUCCIO HUIDOBRO (Chile), having hailed the election of a woman as 
President of the General Conference and commended Mexico's efforts in promoting the 
Tlatelolco Treaty, extended a warm welcome to Benin. 
119. Chile accorded particular importance to nuclear safety, radiation safety and radioactive 
waste safety. Apart from the elaboration of legal instruments, the establishment of a safety 
culture called for solidarity at the national and international levels, transparency, matching of 
deeds to words and, above all, a responsible approach, which was essential for achieving 
safety, peace and development. 
120. The Chilean delegation attached great value to safety regulations and standards, in 
particular to the Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material, the latest revised 
version of which had been approved by the Board of Governors in September 1996 and on 
which Chile had based its own regulations. Chile supported the Agency's efforts to ensure 
that countries applied those regulations and standards effectively. The transport of radioactive 
material was a matter of constant concern for Chile, as demonstrated by the various 
declarations it had made and the regional and subregional agreements it had entered into and 
in particular by its constant endeavours to collaborate in that area with all countries. 
121. With regard to nuclear tests, Chile hoped that the efforts of the French Government 
which had enabled the Agency to study the present and future radiological situation on the 
Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls would serve as an example to other countries. Despite the 
reassuring results of that study, Chile strongly condemned all nuclear tests by whatever 
country and in whatever region, and it deprecated once again the recent tests conducted by 
India and Pakistan. 
122. Chile had vigorously supported the strengthening of the Agency's safeguards system, 
because it was sure that that system would bring greater transparency to the nuclear activities 
of countries. It hoped to be able to enter shortly into consultations with the Agency with a 
view to signing an additional protocol. 
123. Technical co-operation, a statutory function of the Agency essential for all countries, 
and technology transfer did not only benefit the recipient countries, for development was 
synonymous with peace, and co-operation was the mainstay of the battle against poverty. If it 
were not backed up by an unreserved commitment to the development of all regions of the 
world, any talk about safety and safeguards would be marked by ignorance and cynicism. 
Promoting development and technical co-operation was indeed the best way of creating a 
more balanced and safer world. That was why Chile welcomed the Agency's new technical 
co-operation strategy based on the Partners in Development concept, which was already 
starting to bear fruit, since the recipient countries had been able to adapt projects to real 
national priorities and hence to participate more in their implementation. He was sure that 
SAGTAC had contributed considerably to that process of renewal. 
124. Chile had always attached great value to horizontal co-operation, which ensured that 
technology transfer had maximum impact, particularly in Latin America, where development 
in nuclear energy varied from one country to another. By way of example of TCDC, he 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 32 


highlighted the co-operation with Peru and Argentina on eradication of the fruit fly, as well as 
the use of Chilean facilities for radioactive waste treatment and storage as a demonstration 
centre for Latin America. It was convinced that the ARCAL programme, transformed into an 
intergovernmental agreement recently approved by the Board of Governors, would, thanks to 
its obligatory character, further enhance regional co-operation in the field of nuclear energy. 
The Chilean Government had decided to sign that agreement in the near future. Moreover, 
Chile had pledged and paid the whole of its target share of the Technical Co-operation Fund 
and appealed to the donor countries to meet in full their commitments in aid of development. 

125. In conclusion, he stressed the importance which the Chilean Government attached to the 
measures described by the Director General aimed at strengthening the internal management 
of the Agency and creating a "single Agency" culture. Those measures were aimed at raising 
the levels of efficiency and effectiveness in all the Agency's activities through the adoption of 
a medium-term strategy. For that to succeed, it would need to be accompanied by a 
re-evaluation in Member States themselves of the Agency's role with regard to 
decision-making, financing and implementation of activities and, in particular, as regarded its 
perception by the public. In that connection, the measures adopted by the Secretariat to 
strengthen its public information programmes in order to heighten awareness of the true extent 
to which nuclear energy could contribute to development were extremely pertinent and would 
promote interaction among Member States and between them and the Agency. Chile had been 
working towards that objective for more than 15 years and was putting its experience at the 
disposal of the Agency and the other Member States. It now appealed to them all to join in 
that endeavour because only by working together could success be attained. 
126. Mr. KIENER (Switzerland), speaking also on behalf of the Liechtenstein 
delegation, said that nuclear disarmament and non-proliferation were two crucial factors 
determining international security. As long as disparities existed in the world nuclear order 
and the danger of nuclear proliferation had not been totally averted, the international 
community should not spare any effort in that area. The NPT remained the principal tool in 
the service of international peace and stability, but its objectives in respect of nuclear 
disarmament had not yet been achieved despite the fact that the great majority of States, 
having renounced nuclear weapons, had lent their full support to international measures for 
control of their nuclear facilities through the application of comprehensive safeguards 
agreements. Certain Member States had taken a step further by concluding an additional 
protocol to their safeguards agreement, without however receiving any real return in terms of 
global nuclear disarmament. 
127. Switzerland wished to contribute to the strengthening of the international safeguards 
system as long as the implementation of the nuclear non-proliferation regime was not a source 
of discrimination and the system was operated on an equitable basis. The Swiss Government 
was currently engaged in consultations with the groups likely to be affected by the application 
of an additional protocol and it should be ready to commence discussions on that subject with 
the Agency during the coming winter. 
128. Switzerland welcomed the fact that the Conference on Disarmament had finally reached 
a consensus in August 1998 on the elaboration of a fissile material cut-off treaty and that the 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 33 


negotiations on the subject had commenced in Geneva. To achieve its objective, the treaty 
would have to be non-discriminatory and verifiable by the international community. The 
opening of negotiations was an important step in the application of Article VI of the NPT in 
line with the principles and objectives adopted at the NPT Review and Extension Conference. 

129. Switzerland had joined in condemning the double series of nuclear tests performed by 
India and Pakistan which had occurred at the time when 150 States had acceded to the CTBT 
and were preparing the technical conditions for its verification. It appealed to all States which 
had not already done so to sign the CTBT, and to India and Pakistan to refrain from any 
further military nuclear testing. 
130. The Agency's study on the radiological situation of the Mururoa and Fangataufa atolls 
had shown that the fears expressed on the subject had been unfounded. France had 
demonstrated transparency in requesting the Agency to conduct a study of the test site and 
Switzerland hoped that other States with such sites would do likewise. 
131. In Switzerland, the dialogue aimed at formulating a long-term energy policy had served 
to define certain priorities which were concerned principally with energy savings, energy 
efficiency and the promotion of renewable energy sources. There had been no agreement, 
however, on the future utilization of nuclear energy. The question of the storage of 
radioactive waste had given rise to differences of opinion between, on the one hand, the 
opponents of nuclear energy and the ecological organizations and, on the other hand, the 
bodies responsible for the electrical energy sector. The discussions were very difficult and it 
was by no means certain that there would be any positive outcome. 
132. The Ministry of Energy was in the process of revising the law on atomic energy, which 
would lay down the conditions determining the answer to such questions as the construction 
of new reactors, the reprocessing of spent fuel and the service life of nuclear power plants. 
That revision would relaunch the debate on nuclear energy. Various anti-nuclear 
organizations were seeking to mobilize public opinion in favour of instituting a fresh 
moratorium on the development of nuclear energy or even renouncing it forever. Swiss 
citizens could be called upon again to give their judgement on nuclear energy in their country. 
133. The construction of the interim storage centre for radioactive waste at Wiirenlingen was 
progressing and the centre should enter into service in 1999 as scheduled. In addition, an 
exploratory boring was being performed in the North-East of Switzerland to verify whether 
the argillaceous formations there were suitable for the burial of high-level waste. The 
Commission charged with giving its opinion on the project for the storage of low- and 
intermediate-level waste had stated that the Wellenberg site was suitable. If the Ministry of 
Energy confirmed that choice, the population of the canton would have to decide on the 
construction of an exploratory tunnel. Furthermore, a legal provision designed to provide 
cover for the costs likely to be associated with the disposal of radioactive waste was in 
preparation. 
134. The transport of nuclear fuel had given rise to vigorous protests in the spring of 1998 in 
several European countries, including Switzerland. Even if there was no danger for the 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 34 


population and those involved in the transport, the existing rules and measures should be 
applied more widely in future. 


135. The majority of Agency Member States were studying ways of reducing their 
expenditures. Switzerland was of the opinion that for 1999, as for 1998, the Agency's budget 
should be at zero real growth, but for the years to follow it would prefer a nominal-zerogrowth 
budget. In conclusion, he praised the essential role which the Agency was playing in 
the promotion of international co-operation and security and reiterated Switzerland's support 
for the Agency's tasks, as well as its continued desire to participate in those activities. 
136. Ms. HERNES (Norway) welcomed Benin as a new member of the Agency and 
endorsed the statement made by Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
137. Norway attached great importance to the Agency's efforts to enhance nuclear 
non-proliferation by improving the effectiveness of the comprehensive safeguards system. It 
commended the Agency on the early conclusion of additional protocols with a number of 
countries. In 1997, Norway had begun its internal process of preparation for the conclusion of 
an additional protocol and had started consultations with the Secretariat. 
138. Norway had been the first country to ratify, in January 1998, the Joint Convention on the 
Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management. It 
urged all other countries to accede to it in order to secure its entry into force as soon as 
possible. The preparatory work for the implementation of the Joint Convention should start as 
soon as possible and Norway was happy to note that the Agency had already initiated that 
process. As to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, Norway had already submitted its national 
report to the Agency. 
139. A permanent ban on all nuclear tests was of paramount importance. The underground 
tests carried out by India and Pakistan were in clear defiance of international norms and 
constituted a serious threat to global nuclear non-proliferation, as well as to peace and stability 
in the entire region. Those tests underlined the crucial importance of the NPT and the CTBT 
for international efforts to prevent the proliferation of nuclear weapons and to ensure nuclear 
disarmament. Norway urged India and Pakistan to become parties to those two Treaties 
without delay and without conditions. Furthermore, Norway was disappointed that some 
countries were conducting subcritical nuclear tests which, although they did not constitute a 
direct violation of the CTBT, were contrary to its spirit. 
140. While the new Joint Convention provided a legal and regulatory framework for dealing 
with the management of nuclear waste and spent fuel, practical measures were still essential 
and engineering and management skills, political commitment and financial resources, as well 
as, in many cases, joint international initiatives were required. In May 1998, Norway and the 
Russian Federation had signed a framework agreement on co-operation in the field of nuclear 
safety in north-west Russia governing the assistance that Norway would provide to Russia 
with regard to the handling of spent nuclear fuel and radioactive waste stored under dangerous 
conditions in that region and with regard to the safety of nuclear installations. Russia and 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 35 


Norway had managed to agree on the difficult question of liability in case of a nuclear 
accident. 


141. An initial strategy for nuclear cleanup activities, together with a list of priority projects, 
had been established with the Russian authorities within the Contact Expert Group under the 
auspices of the Agency. The experts would soon be meeting to agree on a common 
framework covering legal and organizational measures to strengthen international 
co-operation with respect to the nuclear wastes in the North-West of Russia. Norway 
appreciated the close co-operation that had been established in that field with the European 
Union, the United States and other Western countries. Several projects financed by Norway 
and other Western donors were under way. It was important that Russia should ratify the 
Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage in order to facilitate international 
involvement in such projects. 

142. Norway had been participating since 1992 in a programme to enhance safety at the Kola 
nuclear power plant and to reduce the risks of accidental releases until reactors which did not 
have a satisfactory safety level could be shut down in order to protect human health and the 
environment. Alternative energy sources with fewer environmental risks should be 
considered while bearing in mind that greater efficiency was one way of avoiding increased 
energy production. The first part of the Norwegian-Russian report on radioactive 
contamination from the nuclear installations at Mayak in the southern Urals had been 
completed. It concluded that the release of radionuclides into the river systems had had very 
little effect on the marine environment in the North. The second part would study possible 
accident scenarios and their impact on the population and environment in the northern areas. 
143. Norway attached great importance to the development of a coherent up-to-date 
legislative and regulatory framework governing nuclear activities. It supported national 
assistance programmes for newly independent States in their efforts to develop their nuclear 
legislation and urged other countries and the Agency to continue supporting such efforts. 
144. Illicit trafficking in nuclear material was an international problem and Norway was 
participating actively in various projects to strengthen systems for prevention and detection. It 
appreciated the initiatives taken by the Agency in that area and recommended that efforts be 
stepped up, including efforts to assist various countries in establishing legal frameworks and 
systems of transparency to improve detection and law enforcement. Fanatical terrorist groups 
were becoming more and more cynical in the methods they used to promote their causes. 
Their use of nuclear or radioactive material in future actions could not be ruled out. In order 
to avoid such scenarios, it was essential to give high priority to safeguards, physical 
protection, illicit trafficking and legal frameworks. 
145. The Agency had an important role to play with regard to early warning of a nuclear 
accident or radiological emergency, particularly through the 1986 Early Notification 
Convention. Norway supported the Agency's efforts to help develop emergency warning and 
notification procedures in certain regions such as the Baltic States. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 36 


146. Norway was taking an active part in the second stage of the Arctic Monitoring and 
Assessment Programme and was heading, together with Russia, the work on radioactive 
contamination. Future work would focus on environmental monitoring and on gathering new 
information on the impact of radioactive contamination on human health and the environment. 
The first report confirmed that radioactive discharges from European reprocessing facilities 
could be detected in the Arctic environment. Increased concentrations of technetium-99 
caused by discharges from the Sellafield reprocessing plant in the United Kingdom had been 
detected along the Norwegian coast. 
147. Norway welcomed the agreement reached under the framework of the Convention for 
the Protection of the Marine Environment of the North-East Atlantic aimed at reducing 
discharges of radionuclides into the ocean, the goal being to reduce the levels of artificial 
nuclides resulting from releases to almost zero by the year 2020. The Agency could perhaps 
participate in the establishment of criteria for the protection of the marine environment against 
the effects of radioactive contamination. 
148. The new conventions that had been adopted and applied should give new impetus to 
international co-operation, particularly targeted technical co-operation with countries engaged 
in reforms and developing countries. Norway strongly supported the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme and had already pledged its contribution to the TCF for 1999. 
149. Mr. CHAABANE (Tunisia), having welcomed Benin as a new member of the 
Agency, said that his country had acceded to all the international conventions in the nuclear 
field, because it was convinced that that was the only way of ensuring that nuclear technology 
was used safely for economic and social development. Tunisia had taken steps to strengthen 
international co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to establish 
with the Agency and certain friendly countries special relationships which had led to the 
implementation of several projects in the fields of medicine, agriculture and industry. In that 
connection, he welcomed the establishment, with the assistance of France and the Agency, of 
a semi-industrial pilot food irradiation plant - a project which would be completed by the end 
of 1998. 
150. At regional level, Tunisia was making every effort to strengthen its co-operation with 
the other African countries within the framework of AFRA. In November 1998, it would host 
the fourth Arab congress on nuclear sciences. The Headquarters of the Arab Atomic Energy 
Agency was in Tunisia and it was an organization which had similar objectives to those of the 
Agency, which should strengthen its co-operation with that regional organization. 
151. Tunisia, which regularly paid its assessed contribution to the Regular Budget, had paid 
the voluntary contributions which it had announced the previous years and pledged to pay its 
share of the target for the TCF for 1999. 
152. Tunisia was very interested in small and medium-sized reactors which could be used for 
the production of electricity and potable water, and it had been one of the first countries to 
participate in the work of the expert group on the desalination of sea water. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 37 


153. Having acceded to all international instruments aimed at ensuring non-proliferation and 
the banning of nuclear testing, such as the Pelindaba Treaty on the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa, Tunisia was ready to start consultations with the Agency 
in order to conclude an additional protocol to its comprehensive safeguards agreement. The 
objective was to eliminate all weapons of mass destruction, in particular nuclear weapons, and 
Tunisia could only deplore the continuation of nuclear tests and express its wholehearted 
support for the Final Act adopted at the end of the NAM Summit held in Durban at the 
beginning of the month. 
154. Tunisia was also extremely concerned about Israel's persistent refusal to accede to 
the NPT and to place its installations under Agency safeguards within the framework of a 
safeguards agreement to be concluded for that purpose. Furthermore, Israel continued to 
strengthen its nuclear arsenal thus posing a threat to international peace and no international 
pressure was exerted to dissuade it from doing so. Tunisia therefore reiterated its call for the 
establishment in the Middle East of a nuclear-weapon-free zone to complement the Pelindaba 
Treaty and urged all Member States to make every effort to force Israel to show moderation 
and to submit to international demands so that the nuclear threat could be eliminated and the 
universality of the NPT ensured. He endorsed the statement made on behalf of the Arab 
Group, stressing that the situation in the Middle East was a reminder of the need to establish a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region in order to improve the prospects for a lasting, just and 
global peace. 
155. Tunisia, located as it was on the edge of a particularly sensitive sea route, was, like 
Turkey, Morocco and Egypt, concerned about the danger posed by the maritime transport of 
nuclear waste. It therefore supported the draft resolution submitted by Turkey on the control 
of such transport. 
156. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Tunisia reiterated its support 
for the African position with respect to the number of additional seats. It also supported the 
Arab position on the composition of the MESA Group, particularly since a mimmum level of 
understanding and cohesion between the members of any group was a prerequisite for political 
co-ordination. 
157. Mr. WOHLK (Denmark), having fully endorsed the statement made by Austria on 
behalf of the European Union, called on India and Pakistan to refrain from engaging in a 
nuclear arms race in South Asia, to show the greatest restraint and to avoid any action likely to 
aggravate the situation still further. He also urged them to accede without delay and without 
conditions to the CTBT and the NPT. The NPT was the cornerstone of the global 
non-proliferation regime and an essential element in the pursuit of nuclear disarmament. He 
welcomed the fact that the Treaty had become almost universal and strongly supported the 
important decisions made at the 1995 NPT Review Conference on the subject of the Treaty's 
indefinite extension, the principles and objectives for nuclear non-proliferation and 
disarmament, and the strengthening of the Treaty's review process. 
158. With respect to safeguards, one of the major results achieved by the Agency during the 
past few years had been the adoption in May 1997 of the Model Additional Protocol to 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 38 


existing safeguards agreements which, once it had entered into force, would lead to a 
significant strengthening of effectiveness and a clear improvement in the efficiency of the 
Agency's safeguards system. The Agency would also be in a much better position to detect 
undeclared nuclear activities conducted in non-nuclear-weapon States. Denmark was a party 
to the additional protocol which had just been signed between the Agency, EURATOM and 
the 13 non-nuclear-weapon States of the European Union. It hoped that it would be in a 
position to fulfil its new obligations without delay and urged other countries to conclude 
similar protocols with the Agency to increase as much as possible the scope of the 
strengthened safeguards system. It was regrettable that more than 50 non-nuclear-weapon 
States that were Parties to the NPT had not yet concluded the safeguards agreements foreseen 
under the Treaty. Although those States did not have substantial nuclear activities, it was 
essential for the credibility of the NPT and the safeguards system that all States should honour 
their obligations under Article III. 

159. From the outset, supplier countries had recognized that they had a responsibility to 
ensure that nuclear co-operation in the field of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy did not 
contribute to the proliferation of nuclear weapons. That principle had been enshrined in 
the NPT and during the multilateral consultations on the control of nuclear exports which had 
taken place after the entry into force of the NPT in 1970. The establishment of effective 
control was a prerequisite for compliance with the co-operation commitments set out in 
the NPT. Denmark believed that nuclear suppliers played a particularly important role and 
had made a major positive contribution to the cause of nuclear non-proliferation. He recalled 
the commitment made at the time of the 1995 NPT Review and Extension Conference to 
promote transparency with respect to nuclear-related export controls through dialogue and 
co-operation among the interested States Party to the NPT. The seminar organized the 
previous year by the Nuclear Suppliers Group had been a major event which had led to a 
better understanding of the issues at stake. 
160. Turning to nuclear safety, he recalled that Denmark had decided in 1985 to exclude 
nuclear power as an energy option because it felt that the problems of safety and waste storage 
had not been resolved. Noting that they had still not been solved, he welcomed the efforts 
made to strengthen the safety programme and to co-ordinate the activities carried out by the 
Agency in the fields of nuclear safety, radiation safety and radioactive waste safety. The 
assistance provided by the Agency to the countries of Central and Eastern Europe and to the 
newly independent States was extremely important. Denmark nevertheless remained 
convinced that shutdown was the only defendable solution in the case of certain reactors 
operating in those countries. 
161. Denmark supported the establishment of a comprehensive, legally binding safety regime 
of which the two main elements would be the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint 
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste 
Management. Strengthening of the nuclear liability regime was a matter of concern for the 
whole international community. The adoption of the Protocol to Amend the Vienna 
Convention and of the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage 
were steps in the right direction. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 39 


162. Denmark attached great importance to the technical co-operation programme, which 
continued to expand. The activities undertaken should contribute to the sustainable 
development of developing countries, particularly the LDCs. The target of $73 million 
approved for the TCF for 1999 was acceptable and Denmark had already pledged its full share 
of that target. 
163. Mr. TULLER (Czech Republic) welcomed Benin to the Agency and associated 
himself with the statement which had been made by Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
164. The Agency's principal mission remained unchanged: to promote the contribution of 
nuclear energy to peace, health and prosperity, and to ensure that it was not used for military 
purposes. The nuclear tests carried out in South Asia underlined the relevance of that 
mandate. The international community should not relax its efforts to prevent the proliferation 
of nuclear weapons. He appealed to those States which had not yet done so, and in particular 
to those with nuclear capabilities, to accede swiftly and unconditionally to the NPT and 
the CTBT. He also called upon the States concerned to stop their military programmes and 
place all their nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
165. The Czech Republic remained deeply committed to the principles of the NPT and made 
every effort to comply with its obligations under the Treaty and the relevant nuclear material 
control regimes. In compliance with its new safeguards agreement with the Agency, which 
had entered into force at the end of 1997, his country had successfully completed the 
verification of its initial report on its inventory of nuclear material. 
166. He was concerned about the growing threat from organized gangs trafficking in nuclear 
material which were using his country for their activities. The most effective protection 
against such trafficking lay in the application of strict measures in the country of origin under 
its national nuclear material accounting and control system. Co-operation between the 
Agency and Member States also played an important role. He welcomed the Agency's 
programme to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear material and other radioactive sources and, 
in particular, the setting up of a database on cases of seizure, which would prove a valuable 
tool for communication and notification. One example of fruitful co-operation between 
Member States and the Agency was the regional courses on physical protection of nuclear 
material which had been organized in his country since 1995 under the aegis of the Agency 
and the Governments of the Czech Republic and the United States of America. 
167. The Czech Republic attached great importance to the safety of nuclear installations. It 
was in the process of finalizing the national report required by the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety. That report contained detailed information on the existing legal framework, and a case 
study for the Dukovany and Temelin plants. In accordance with its obligations under the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, the Government of the Czech Republic monitored compliance 
with nuclear safety and radiation protection standards by nuclear installations in the country both 
those which were in operation and those under construction. In the preceding year, the 
national nuclear safety authority had carried out a complete re-evaluation of the safety of the 
four units of the Dukovany plant, following which it had authorized continued unrestricted 
operation. The construction of the Temelin plant was continuing and commissioning of the 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 40 


first unit was planned for the summer of the year 2000. The Czech Government had decided 
to set up an independent commission of experts to produce an objective assessment of the 
economic aspects of the investment, including possible financial risks. 


168. In accordance with its long-term policy in the field of safe management of radioactive 
waste and spent fuel, the Czech Republic had signed the Joint Convention on the Safety of 
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, to which it 
attached great importance and which it considered a legally binding instrument introducing 
the highest safety standards in a particularly sensitive area. He called upon States which had 
not yet done so to sign and ratify the Joint Convention in order to facilitate its early entry into 
force. 
169. Turning to technical assistance and co-operation, he said that, to fulfil its mandate, the 
Agency had to carry out effective, results-oriented and cost-efficient activities, and have 
predictable financial resources available. Member States should be aware of the fact that 
whether or not the target for the TCF was met depended upon them, and they should therefore 
pay their contributions in full and on time. 
170. His country recognized the importance of technical co-operation projects for recipient 
countries which had sometimes no other means of resolving a particular problem. It was 
gradually increasing its involvement in Agency technical co-operation activities in other 
countries, with which it was sharing its knowledge and experience. Thus, it had participated 
in missions to Armenia to improve nuclear safety and radiation protection, and to Ukraine to 
exchange experience on licensing procedures for instrumentation and control systems and to 
improve regulatory capabilities in the field of safety. It had also assisted with the preparation 
of the technical co-operation project on improvement of in-service monitoring of WWER 
reactor pressure vessels in Ukraine and was prepared to contribute to that project's funding. 
In addition, it was accepting more Agency trainees from developing countries and the 
countries of the former Soviet Union. In the preceding year, 28 trainees had taken part in 
courses given by the national nuclear safety authority, the Nuclear Research Institute, the 
Faculty of Nuclear Engineering and by medical institutions. It had approved ten applications 
and registered an additional 15 requests for the period September-December 1998. 
171. Ms. DORAN (Ireland), after associating herself with the statement which had 
been made by Austria on behalf of the European Union, paid tribute to the work of the Agency 
and its staff. The Agency had played a crucial role in promoting nuclear safety and 
strengthening the nuclear non-proliferation regime and the international safeguards system. 
Like many other States, Ireland had rejected the nuclear power option because it believed that 
the risks of nuclear power outweighed significantly its alleged benefits. The risk of a major 
nuclear accident, combined with understandable public concerns about the effects of 
discharges of nuclear material on the environment and about the disposal of spent fuel and 
radioactive waste, had led Ireland to the firm conclusion that the case for nuclear power was 
unsound. It was for that reason that Ireland's priorities were the Agency's nuclear safety and 
radiation protection activities, and the contribution it made to an enhanced nuclear safety 
culture worldwide. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 41 


172. It was essential that the Agency should continue to foster international co-operation in 
the field of nuclear safety, despite the prevailing economic and political instability in many 
regions of the world. The recent international conventions and the Agency's technical 
co-operation activities were of major importance in promoting higher safety standards. 
Ireland looked forward with interest to the first meeting of the Parties to the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety, to be held in spring 1999, and hoped that the "peer review" process provided 
for under the Convention would prove effective in achieving improved safety standards 
worldwide. It also hoped that the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management 
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, which represented a further potential 
advance in radiation protection and in achieving uniformity in standards of regulation, would 
enter into force speedily. 
173. One of the main concerns of successive Irish Governments had been the risk to the Irish 
population posed by the nuclear industry of the United Kingdom and, in particular, the 
Sellafield plant. Her country was opposed to the continuation of hazardous nuclear activities 
such as reprocessing, on-site storage of high-level liquid waste and the operation of Magnox 
reactors beyond their design life. It had also stated its opposition to the expansion of 
operations envisaged in the proposed MOX plant and the continuing radioactive discharges 
from Sellafield into the Irish Sea. The Irish Government would continue to make known its 
views that the operations at Sellafield were unacceptable to Ireland, and it strongly urged that 
reprocessing and all forms of nuclear energy production at the Sellafield site should cease. 
174. Turning to the question of radioactive discharges, she drew attention to the agreement 
reached by the Parties to the Convention for the Protection of the Marine Environment of the 
North-East Atlantic, and welcomed the fact that they had committed themselves to reducing 
radioactive discharges into the marine environment to almost zero by the year 2020. That was 
an important decision which would allay the legitimate concerns over the impact of 
radioactive discharges on the health of existing and future generations, and which would help 
preserve maritime resources. 
175. With regard to nuclear liability, Ireland welcomed the adoption of the Protocol to 
Amend the Vienna Convention and of the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for 
Nuclear Damage. Though that would certainly improve the compensation regime for the 
victims of nuclear accidents, her country was not convinced that the compensation levels were 
adequate. Ultimately, the success of the new regime would depend on early adherence to 
those new instruments by the main nuclear power producers. 
176. The nuclear non-proliferation regime enshrined in the NPT remained the cornerstone of 
international efforts to promote the peaceful use of nuclear energy and to prevent the spread of 
nuclear weapons, as well as the essential foundation for nuclear disarmament. One of the 
Agency's most important achievements in recent years had been the adoption by the Board of 
Governors of the Model Additional Protocol aimed at strengthening the effectiveness and 
improving the efficiency of the safeguards system. That very day, Ireland had signed the 
additional protocol to its safeguards agreement and it would, in close co-operation with its 
partners from the European Union, EURATOM and the Agency, play its part in ensuring its 
effective implementation. 

GC(42)/OR.4 
page 42 


177. With the NPT vision in mind, the Minister of Foreign Affairs of Ireland, together with 
his counterparts of seven other countries, had launched a declaration on 9 June 1998 entitled 
"Towards a nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda" (reproduced in document 
INFCIRC/565). That agenda was not a replacement for the NPT, but it did set out the logical 
final steps required to achieve the objectives of that Treaty while respecting the sovereign 
equality of States, and to rid the world of nuclear weapons for all time. 
178. Mr. PALACIOS (Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of 
Nuclear Materials) said that, thanks to the unfailing support of Argentina and Brazil, ABACC 
had extended its regional safeguards system to all nuclear facilities in both countries, and had 
improved it by incorporating new concepts and technologies so that it was now able to cover 
effectively all envisageable divergence scenarios for the uranium enrichment facilities subject 
to its control, and was able to yield conclusive inspection results. 
179. Under the Quadripartite Agreement between Argentina, Brazil, the IAEA and ABACC, 
co-ordination and co-operation between ABACC and the Agency had progressed 
satisfactorily, as was illustrated by the results achieved during the past year. Two facility 
attachments had been approved for Argentina and five for Brazil, all of which had entered into 
force. Working procedures had been adopted by ABACC and the Agency for the sharing of 
equipment and others were being finalized. The aim was to avoid duplication of effort while 
preserving the independence of the two organizations. With respect to co-ordination of 
activities with the Agency, ABACC had been able to increase the efficiency of safeguards, in 
particular in the case of nuclear power plants. It had signed a technical co-operation 
agreement with the Agency which would enable it to make the existing links official and to 
extend them, in particular with regard to the adoption of the new techniques envisaged in the 
additional protocol to safeguards agreements, such as remote monitoring and environmental 
sampling. 
180. There had also been fruitful co-operation between ABACC and the United States 
Department of Energy in the nuclear non-proliferation field. During the past year, ABACC's 
network of laboratories and the New Brunswick Laboratory had completed a second 
intercomparison exercise, a remote monitoring system had been installed at the Embalse 
nuclear power plant - with the collaboration of the Agency and the Argentine authority, and a 
data receiving system had been installed at ABACC headquarters in Rio de Janeiro. At the 
same time, ABACC was strengthening its links with EURATOM and was exchanging 
experience with it and co-operating with it in various areas of common interest. 
181. With regard to the role of regional systems in the strengthening of safeguards, the 
Argentine and Brazilian Governments were currently studying the role that ABACC would be 
called upon to play in the future. Nevertheless, a regional system could not be efficient unless 
it was properly integrated into the international system. For that to occur, the resources of 
both systems had to be optimized by swiftly applying new work concepts and incorporating 
methods which would reinforce trust between the bodies responsible for the application of 
safeguards. 
The meeting rose at 7.20 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.5 
4 November 1998 
GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE FIFTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1998, at 10.05 a.m. 


President: Mr. FRSTER (Netherlands) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 


7 General debate and annual report for 1997 (continued) 
1-119 

Statements by the delegates of: 


Finland 
1-4 

Sri Lanka 
5-14 

Slovakia 
15-29 

Belgium 
30-40 

Bulgaria 
41-49 

Turkey 
50-62 

Algeria 
63-73 

Hungary 
74-83 

Viet Nam 
84-85 

Saudi Arabia 
86-94 

European Commission 
95 -102 

Lebanon 
103-110 

Brazil 
111-117 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 

98-03466 (XXXVIII) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 



GC(42)/OR.5 
page 2 


ABACC 


Basic Safety 
Standards 
Biological 


Weapons 
Convention 
CERN 
Chemical Weapons 
Convention 
CTBT 
CTBTO 
DPRK 
ECU 
EURATOM 


G-7 
INIS 
IRRT 
Joint Convention 

KEDO 
MESA 
MOX 
NAM 
NEA 
NPT 
NPT Review 
Conference 
OECD 
OSART 
Pelindaba Treaty 
PHARE 

RBMK 
RCA 

START 
TACIS 
TCF 
Transport Regulations 

Wassenaar 
Arrangement 
WWER 

Abbreviations used in this record 


Brazilian-Argentine Agency for Accounting and Control of Nuclear Materials 

International Basic Safety Standards for Protection against Ionizing 

Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation Sources 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and 

Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxic Weapons and on 

their Destruction 
European Organization for Nuclear Research 

Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, 
Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction 

ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 

ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-BanTreaty Organization 

Democratic People's Republic of Korea 

European currency unit 

European Atomic Energy Community 

Group of Seven [leading industrial countries] 

InternationalNuclear Information System 

International Regulatory Review Team 

Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the 
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management 

Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 

Middle East and South Asia 

Mixed oxide 

Non-Aligned Movement 

Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 

Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 

of Nuclear Weapons 

Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 

Operational Safety Review Team 

African Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone Treaty 

European Union programme of assistance for economic restructuring in the 

countries of Central and Eastern Europe 

High-power channel-type reactor (Soviet Union) 

Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and Training 

Related to Nuclear Science and Technology (for Asia and the Pacific) 

Treaty on the Reduction and Limitation of Strategic Offensive Arms 

Technical Assistance for the Commonwealth of Independent States 

Technical Co-operation Fund 

Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material 

Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Anns and 

Dual-Use Goods and Technologies 

Water-cooled and -moderated reactor 


GC(42)/OR.5 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (continued) 
(GC(42)/5) 


1. Ms. MAKELAINE 
N (Finland) endorsed the statement made by Austria on behalf 
of the European Union and said that the Union's view that high-priority programmes should 
be fully justified meant that the activity should fall within the Agency's sphere of competence 
and that the work was not already being done elsewhere. In that context, she noted that the 
Director General would be attending the fortieth anniversary celebration of the Nuclear 
Energy Agency of the OECD later in the month and would be discussing the proposal to 
establish a Memorandum of Understanding between the NEA and the Agency that would 
delineate possible areas and modes of co-operation. There would undoubtedly be many areas 
in which co-operation and co-ordination would be possible. However, the responsibility for 
avoiding duplication and overlap lay not only with the two agencies: the Member States of 
the NEA should remain vigilant in that respect, both in Vienna and in Paris. 
2. Turning to the Agency's programme for 1999, she said that while the application of 
radioisotopes or radiation played a significant role in solving certain problems, in many cases 
new techniques were replacing nuclear techniques and the Agency should no longer be 
involved in activities where non-nuclear techniques were more suitable. That position was 
not always reflected in the proposed programme for 1999. Under the present budgetary 
constraints experienced by so many Member States, programmes which did not fall within the 
Agency's statutory responsibility could not be justified, particularly since a large number of 
high-priority activities were currently being run by cost-free experts or funded from voluntary 
contributions. The senior expert group appointed by the Director General should look closely 
at those issues. 
3. Finland had remained flexible with regard to the Agency's severe budgetary constraints. 
It had not supported the zero growth principle per se and had always paid its due share of the 
Regular Budget and the Technical Co-operation Fund without delay. On several occasions, 
however, it had stated that the budget should be decided only after the programme had been 
discussed. The present situation, in which a number of priority activities, largely safeguards 
programmes, were financed through voluntary contributions, was not satisfactory. The 
problem was basically caused by the need to balance the safeguards and promotional 
activities, but the fact was usually overlooked that not only the technical co-operation 
programme, but also all the nuclear applications programmes and, to a large extent, the 
nuclear power programmes were promotional activities. In financial terms, therefore, the 
promotional part of the Agency's work far exceeded the regulatory part. 
4. Finland noted with pleasure the rapidly increasing number of States which had signed an 
additional protocol to their comprehensive or voluntary safeguards agreements. The previous 
day, the 15 Member States of the European Union had made a notable addition to that 
number, not only in terms of the number of signatures, but also in terms of the quantity of new 
activities to be covered by the Agency's safeguards system. The huge amount of new work 
awaiting the Agency through the implementation of all the additional protocols called for a 
complete rethinking of the system. The procedures required to carry out the new duties 
should not simply be added to the existing system, but an integrated safeguards system 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 4 


covering both old and new tasks should be developed. Finland welcomed the Director 
General's initiative in that direction. Such integration would in turn have consequences on the 
thinking of the whole non-proliferation community and the concept "full-scope safeguards" 
might require a new definition. 

5. Mr. POOLOKASINGHAM (Sri Lanka), having welcomed Benin as a new 
member of the Agency, commended the restructuring measures initiated by the Director 
General aimed at improving efficiency. Sri Lanka had highlighted the need for measures to 
maintain a truly independent and competent international civil service at the forty-first session 
of the General Conference. It was therefore very pleased at the Agency's recent decision to 
adhere to its Statute and no longer require government sponsorship for staff recruitment. 
6. The Agency's technical co-operation programme had helped Sri Lanka to use nuclear 
technology to improve heath care facilities and to increase agricultural and industrial 
productivity. The Model Project concept, Country Programme Frameworks and Integrated 
Evaluation Framework would no doubt contribute to increasing the socio-economic benefits 
of the technical co-operation programme and to ensuring that it was better oriented towards 
end-users. However, due consideration should be given to the vastly differing conditions in 
Member States when formulating country programmes. 
7. Sri-Lanka appreciated the efforts of the Deputy Director General for Technical 
Co-operation and his staff to improve the technical co-operation programme. The guidelines 
for planning and designing technical co-operation projects and the national workshop on 
technical co-operation project design, management and evaluation had helped Sri Lanka 
to design projects which were likely to generate socio-economic benefits in 1999-2000. 
Sri Lanka also welcomed the proposals, set out in the Technical Co-operation Report for 
1997, to establish long-term partnerships between Member States and qualified institutions for 
the purpose of technology transfer, which would allow recipient Member States to develop 
their capabilities in a consistent manner. 
8. The reduction in resources allocated to the technical co-operation programme 
since 1995 and the resulting difficulties faced by the programme was a cause for concern and 
he appealed to all Member States to pay their contributions. The Government of Sri Lanka, 
despite the financial constraints it faced, was paying both its contribution to the TCF and its 
assessed programme costs. His Government had recognized the role that nuclear technology 
could play in national development and had allocated 70 million rupees for the construction of 
a building to house the laboratories of the Atomic Energy Authority of Sri Lanka and was 
making available adequate resources for the development of the laboratories. 
9. Under the Regional Model Project on Upgrading Radiation Protection Infrastructure, 
Sri Lanka had been able to improve its regulatory programme and would be in a position to 
conform to the Basic Safety Standards in the near future. The Sri Lankan delegation 
appreciated the Agency's efforts in that regard. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 5 


10. The RCA had brought considerable benefits to its members, including Sri Lanka. While 
Sri Lanka welcomed the improvements that were being made to the RCA's management 
structure, it felt that there should be close consultation between the Agency and the Member 
States on the implementation of RCA programmes. 
11. The end of the Cold War had given rise to new concerns, one of which was trafficking 
in nuclear materials and the possibility of acts of nuclear terrorism. The Agency, while 
helping Member States to strengthen their national regulatory infrastructures, should 
concentrate on upgrading their systems for the physical protection of, accounting for and 
control of nuclear materials. 
12. Following the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan in May 1998, Sri Lanka had expressed 
the view that the security of the region could not be considered in isolation and that there was 
an increased need for efforts by the entire international community to achieve global nuclear 
disarmament and, eventually, the total elimination of nuclear weapons. In 1995, no 
organization had existed which dealt specifically with nuclear testing, but since then the 
Preparatory Commission for the CTBTO had been established. That institution, together with 
the Conference on Disarmament and the United Nations Disarmament Commission, were the 
appropriate ones to deal with issues of nuclear non-proliferation and disarmament. 
Furthermore, since the Board of Governors had spent considerable time in June discussing the 
recent nuclear tests, he saw no need for the General Conference to discuss the matter. 
13. The Heads of Government at the NAM Summit in Durban earlier that month had 
reiterated the need for an action plan to achieve total elimination within a specified time and 
had called for an international conference to be held, preferably by 1999, to agree on such a 
plan. The international community should not focus on the issue of non-proliferation at the 
expense of nuclear disarmament, nor should it focus on horizontal proliferation at the expense 
of vertical proliferation. 
14. The NAM Summit had noted the establishment of the ad hoc committee on negative 
security assurances and commended the establishment of an ad hoc committee to negotiate a 
fissile material cut-off treaty. It had also reiterated its endorsement of the International Court 
of Justice's advisory opinion on the early conclusion of a nuclear weapons convention, while 
noting with concern the persistence of undue restrictions on exports to developing countries of 
material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes and emphasizing the need for 
transparency in that regard. It had also called on nuclear-weapon States to comply with 
Article VI of the NPT, recognized the need for an instrument to prohibit attacks or threats of 
attacks on nuclear facilities used for peaceful purposes, and welcomed the United Nations 
General Assembly's adoption of a resolution to convene a fourth special session devoted to 
disarmament. 
15. Mr. LIPR (Slovakia) welcomed Benin as a new member of the Agency and 
endorsed the statement by the representative of Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
16. Noting that the conclusion of additional protocols to safeguards agreements made a 
significant contribution to global nuclear non-proliferation, he recalled that the Board of 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 6 


Governors had approved the text of the new agreement between the Slovak Republic and the 
Agency for the application of safeguards in connection with the NPT and an additional 
protocol to that agreement. Other Member States which had not already done so should 
accelerate the process of concluding additional protocols. 


17. It was regrettable that the DPRK's compliance with respect to verification activities 
remained limited and that there was a fundamental difference of view between the Agency and 
the DPRK regarding the status of its safeguards agreement. The Director General's initiative 
to provide the DPRK with a copy of the Model Additional Protocol was a good one. The 
DPRK should co-operate fully with the Agency in the implementation of its safeguards 
obligations and negotiate the conclusion of an additional protocol. 
18. Slovakia much regretted Iraq's decision to suspend its co-operation with the Security 
Council and the Agency, and urged Iraq to observe the relevant Security Council resolutions 
and the Memorandum of Understanding with the United Nations Secretary-General. 
19. The issues of non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament had become the focus of great 
attention since the nuclear tests in India and Pakistan. Slovakia believed that nuclear energy 
should be used exclusively for peaceful purposes and that there should be universal and 
unconditional adherence to the NPT and CTBT. For its part, Slovakia had ratified the CTBT 
in March 1998. Slovakia believed that co-operation between the Agency and the Preparatory 
Commission for the CTBTO should be strengthened for political, technical and financial 
reasons. 
20. Slovakia supported the Director General's offer of assistance in connection with the 
decision of the Conference on Disarmament to start negotiations on a treaty prohibiting the 
production of fissile materials for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices and 
welcomed the reduction of existing stockpiles of fissile material by nuclear-weapon States and 
the results of the recent negotiations between the Presidents of the Russian Federation and of 
the United States, especially on the management and disposal of plutonium withdrawn in 
stages from nuclear military programmes. 
21. With regard to the action plan which had emerged from the senior management meeting 
earlier in the year, the initiative to place greater emphasis on programme and budget 
formulation by creating a new programme co-ordination committee was welcome in view of 
the financial difficulties of the past ten years. The process of optimizing resource allocations 
to maintain the Agency's principal functions should be further evaluated and developed with 
the aim of achieving greater cost-effectiveness for the benefit of all Member States. 
22. A more active public information service would contribute significantly to public 
understanding of the advantages of nuclear energy and at the same time increase public 
confidence. The Agency should in particular publicize the improvements achieved in nuclear 
safety in Member States and use the most modern and effective tools, such as the Internet, and 
high-quality materials and publications to help promote a positive attitude towards nuclear 
energy among the public. In that connection, he noted that the international public 
information seminar hosted by Slovakia earlier in the year had been a great success. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 7 


23. Slovakia was about to celebrate the twentieth anniversary of the commissioning of the 
first WWER reactor at Bohunice and the launching of an extensive programme for the 
construction of nuclear power plants of that type in former Czechoslovakia. Nuclear power in 
Slovakia, which had been one of the first countries to ratify the Convention on Nuclear Safety, 
and expected to deposit its instrument of ratification of the Joint Convention on the Safety of 
Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management by the end of 
the year, was one of its most effective, reliable and safe power sources. 
24. The four WWER-440 units at Bohunice had very good safety records. A number of 
international missions, mainly from the Agency, had reviewed the design and operational 
safety of the reactors and concluded that operation was safe, but that further safety 
improvement was possible and feasible. A comprehensive safety improvement programme 
was under way to improve safety and missions by the Agency in February and in June had 
concluded that satisfactory progress had been made in that respect. 
25. The first unit of the Mochovce power plant had reached criticality on 9 June 1998, and 
the commissioning of unit 2 was planned for 1999. The Mochovce nuclear power plant was 
an example of international co-operation to achieve internationally acceptable safety 
standards, with companies from France, Germany, the United States, the Russian Federation, 
the Czech Republic and Slovakia, as well as the Agency, having been involved. The 
Agency's services in particular were an essential component of international transparency in 
all safety-related matters. 
26. Following a joint request by the Slovak and Austrian Governments, the Agency had 
assembled an independent group of internationally recognized experts to examine the reported 
embrittlement of the reactor pressure vessel of unit 1 at Mochovce. The experts had 
concluded that the integrity of the reactor pressure vessel gave no cause for concern. 
27. In connection with resolution GC(41)/RES/21, the Slovak Government had decided in 
July 1998 to contribute a sum of ECU 2.5 million to the Shelter Implementation Plan for the 
Chernobyl sarcophagus, despite its budgetary difficulties and the natural disasters which had 
occurred in Slovakia during the year. On a related subject, he noted that an agreement 
between Slovakia and Ukraine on the early notification of nuclear accidents and on the 
exchange of information and co-operation in the field of nuclear safety and radiation 
protection was expected to be signed during the General Conference. 
28. On 1 April 1998, the Slovak National Council had approved the Atomic Act which 
governed the peaceful use of nuclear energy in Slovakia, as well as the rights and obligations 
involved in the utilization of nuclear energy, the requirements of the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety, the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management, the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear 
Damage and also commitments arising from other international treaties and agreements. It 
was also fully compatible with European Union legislation in that area. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 8 


29. Before concluding, he noted with regard to Article VI of the Agency's Statute that 
although Slovakia was not in favour of amending the Statute, it was prepared to support any 
proposal that was acceptable to regional groups and at the same time reflected the interests of 
its own region. 
30. Mr. ADAM (Belgium), having endorsed the statement made on behalf of the 
European Union, said that along with its European Union partners his country had signed an 
additional protocol to its safeguards agreement, and hoped that other States would very soon 
do likewise since universal application of the Model Additional Protocol would help ensure 
peace and security throughout the world. In that connection, it would be useful if the Agency 
were to draw up specific proposals for submission to the Board in the near future regarding 
possibilities of reducing routine inspections as a way of compensating for the increased 
obligations assumed by States and other parties to safeguards agreements in connection with 
implementation of the Model Additional Protocol. 
31. Turning to technical co-operation, he said that the quality and management of the 
Agency's technical co-operation projects had improved significantly in recent years; the 
Agency was to be congratulated, in particular, on the eradication of the tsetse fly from 
Zanzibar, in which Belgium had been proud to participate through its extrabudgetary 
contributions. Belgium would be contributing again to the TCF as of 1999, and would also 
continue to finance the co-ordinated research programme for the development of new banana 
genotypes, which were expected to make an important contribution to the self-sufficiency in 
terms of food of certain developing countries. 
32. In the area of nuclear safety, Belgium was playing an active part in the contact expert 
group for international co-operation on radioactive waste management in the Russian 
Federation. Belgium was also continuing to contribute to the Agency's very useful 
extrabudgetary programme on the safety of RBMK and WWER reactors in Eastern Europe. 
33. He was grateful for the initiatives already taken and those that would be taken in the 
future to improve the operation of the Agency and to streamline the work of the General 
Conference and the Board of Governors. In that connection, he looked forward to proposals 
from the Secretariat for revitalizing the meetings of the Board. 
34. It was difficult to speak of the Board without referring to the question of the amendment 
of Article VI of the Statute. For a long time Belgium had been in favour of a limited increase 
in the size of the Board so as to ensure better representation of States with significant nuclear 
programmes, and that was why Belgium was supporting the proposals of the Chairman of the 
Board which aimed to provide a global solution to all questions relating to the Board's size 
and composition. 
35. In 1997, Belgian nuclear power stations had broken all productivity records and the 
production of electricity from nuclear sources now represented 60.2% of total production. 
Those results were due to the fact that the nuclear power plants had been operational for 
approximately 90% of the year. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 9 


36. There had been much discussion regarding the utilization of fissile material surpluses 
resulting from the dismantling of nuclear weapons, and the recycling of plutonium of military 
origin as MOX fuel had received particular attention. Belgium, which was very concerned 
about the existence of so many stocks of plutonium of military origin, intended to play an 
active part in their elimination and recycling for civilian purposes. In fact, the firm 
Belgonucleaire was the pioneer of MOX fuel fabrication, having begun industrial production 
of MOX for light-water reactors in 1986; to meet the new demands, a substantial 
modernization programme was under way, with some $36 million having been invested over 
the past four years. 
37. The Belgian nuclear authorities regarded the safety of installations as being of prime 
importance and were undertaking a huge modernization programme. The safe management of 
radioactive waste and spent fuel also received a great deal of attention since a solution to the 
problem was crucial to the future use of nuclear energy, especially for the purposes of 
electricity production. Both the Tihange and Doel nuclear power plants had received 
authorization to operate interim and long-term storage facilities for their spent fuel. 
Radioactive waste from the decommissioning of earlier facilities was stored at buildings of 
Belgoprocess and the CILVA waste processing facility had sufficient capacity to meet 
Belgium's requirements in the area of low-level solid and liquid waste. Through a slight 
increase in their prices, electricity producers had set aside resources to cover the costs of 
managing the radioactive waste resulting from the future decommissioning of power plants. 
A special fund had also been set up for the management of existing waste. 
38. On the basis of the report presented by the National Organization for Radioactive Waste 
and Fissile Material (ONDRAF) on the various options for the long-term management of 
low-level and short-lived waste, the Government had decided to move away from long-term 
storage to final disposal and had asked ONDRAF to continue its studies so that a choice could 
be made between near-surface and geological disposal of such waste. 
39. As to the fuel cycle, no final choice had yet been made between reprocessing and 
disposal of spent fuel as further research was required. Belgium was therefore very keen to 
participate in the working group established by the Agency on fuel cycle options, and was 
pleased to note that its mandate did not overlap with work being undertaken in other forums. 
40. Internationally, Belgium, like other Western countries, was continuing with its efforts to 
improve the safety of nuclear installations in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe. 
In 1997, Belgian engineers working with European consortiums had contributed their 
expertise to more than 30 projects in Eastern Europe, such as the modernization of the nuclear 
power plant in Novovoronezh, the management of the units at Kalinin and South Ukraine 
nuclear power plants, the production of a simulator for the Beloyarsk nuclear power plant, and 
the management of radioactive wastes and the storage of spent fuel in the North-West of the 
Russian Federation. Belgium had also provided consultancy services in a number of 
Republics of the former Soviet Union, Poland, Bulgaria, Slovakia and the Czech Republic. 
41. Mr. KASTCHIEV (Bulgaria), having associated himself with the statement made 
on behalf of the European Union, said that, as a State Party to the NPT, Bulgaria firmly 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 10 


believed that it was the cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime and that it 
should be universalized and effectively implemented. Bulgaria also supported the early entry 
into force of the CTBT and welcomed the recent decision of the Conference on Disarmament 
to establish an ad hoc committee to conduct negotiations on a fissile material cut-off treaty. 
Bulgaria had therefore been deeply concerned over the nuclear tests carried out earlier in the 
year by India and Pakistan, and called on both countries to adhere to the international nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. 

42. As a keen supporter of the Agency's programme for a strengthened and more 
cost-effective safeguards system, Bulgaria had signed an additional protocol to its safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. The Agency's safeguards system was of universal benefit and 
would remain the key element in providing assurances that nuclear activities were being 
carried out only for peaceful purposes - assurances that were a prerequisite for the transfer of 
nuclear technology, equipment and material. Bulgaria accordingly welcomed the conclusion 
in the Annual Report for 1997 that the Agency had not found any indication of diversion of 
nuclear material or of the misuse of safeguarded facilities, equipment and non-nuclear 
material. 
43. Illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources had become a new 
challenge to the international nuclear non-proliferation regime in recent years, and while the 
prime responsibility lay with Member States to ensure adequate physical protection and to 
establish effective national systems for accountancy and control, Bulgaria recognized the 
growing importance of international co-operation as well as the valuable role the Agency 
could play by co-ordinating measures to assist in areas such as the exchange of information 
and training. National export control mechanisms were also an important tool for preventing 
nuclear proliferation. 
44. Turning to safety issues, he announced that Bulgaria would be signing the Joint 
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste 
Management during the current session of the General Conference and that it was considering 
measures to achieve full correspondence with the requirements of the Joint Convention. As a 
Contracting Party to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, Bulgaria had submitted to the Agency 
a report on the measures it had taken to implement the obligations of the Convention pursuant 
to its Article 5. Bulgaria highly appreciated the Agency's activities in the field of nuclear 
safety and radiation protection and the management of radioactive waste, and in particular its 
work on safety assessment of WWER reactors. 
45. The Agency's technical co-operation activities were important for the peaceful 
application of atomic energy in many Member States, including Bulgaria, which welcomed 
the improvements in the management of the technical co-operation programme and the 
Agency's results in transferring nuclear technologies, training specialists, and providing 
expert services and equipment to Member States. 
46. The Agency's programme for 1999-2000 was well balanced and its activities relating to 
safeguards, technical co-operation and nuclear and radiation safety were all high priorities. 
Bulgaria supported the programme as well as the proposed budget for 1999. Bulgaria had 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 11 


paid in full its pledged contribution to the TCF for 1997 and 1998, as well as its assessed 
contribution to the Regular Budget for 1997 and the share in US dollars for 1998. It hoped to 
pay the remaining Austrian schillings share in the next few months. Its voluntary contribution 
to the TCF for 1999 would be the equivalent of $10 000 in national currency. 


47. In Bulgaria, 41.4% of total electricity generation was from the nuclear power units of 
the Kozloduy nuclear power plant. Measures continued to be implemented in 1997 to 
enhance the plant's safe operation, with completion of the third stage of the programme for 
the reconstruction, safety upgrading and backfitting of its units 1 to 4 and modernization of its 
main technological systems. A new programme for the enhancement of the safety of units 1 
to 4 to ensure safe operation until the end of their design lifetime had been drawn up and 
submitted to the Bulgarian Nuclear Safety Authority. The programme for modernizing 
Kozloduy units 5 and 6 had also been drawn up by the operator and approved. 
Implementation of the programme had begun in the middle of 1998 and would be carried out 
jointly by national and foreign companies, including Westinghouse and a consortium of 
Siemens, Framatom and a number of Russian organizations. 
48. In using nuclear power and ionizing radiation sources, which were widely employed in 
medicine, agriculture, industry and scientific research, Bulgaria took appropriate measures to 
ensure nuclear safety and radiation protection. The Agency's assistance in those areas was 
greatly appreciated. The IRRT mission conducted by the Agency in November 1997 had 
concluded that the basic organization and structures for regulating the use of atomic energy, 
including competent and dedicated staff, were in place. Measures had been developed to 
implement the recommendations made relating to inspections and the assessment of nuclear 
safety and radiation protection. The Bulgarian Government was also considering a 
programme to strengthen the regulatory regime with respect to nuclear safety and radiation 
protection, bringing it more into line with that of the European Union with the updating and 
elaboration of more than 30 normative acts in the period 1998-1999. 
49. Bulgaria had benefited from excellent co-operation with the Agency's Department of 
Nuclear Safety and with its Department of Technical Co-operation. It was grateful for the 
Agency's assistance in connection with the application of electron beam technology for the 
purification of flue gases at the Maritza 2 thermal power plant, the management of the 
consequences of uranium mining and the improvement of the safety of the Novi Han 
radioactive waste repository. It was also grateful to the Agency for providing training for its 
specialists through fellowships and visits. Bulgaria accepted specialists from other 
developing countries for training in its institutes and organizations, and its institutes and 
universities also took part in the Agency's research programmes. In addition, Bulgaria had 
been participating in regional projects connected with the operational management and safety 
assessment of nuclear power plants, licensing fuel and fuel modelling codes for WWER 
reactors, the disposal of low- and intermediate-level radioactive waste and the marine 
environmental assessment of the Black Sea region. It also co-operated in the nuclear field 
with neighbouring countries and had signed intergovernmental agreements in the past year 
with Turkey and Romania. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 12 


50. Ms. OK (Turkey), having congratulated the President on her election, urged full 
implementation of resolution GC(41)/RES/19 on equal representation of the sexes in the 
Secretariat, particularly at senior levels, in keeping with the increasing number of women 
representatives in senior posts in the Agency's policy-making organs. She also warmly 
welcomed Benin as a new member of the Agency. 
51. A large number of tasks had been added to the Agency's traditional functions. It was 
particularly gratifying, after many years of controversy, that the Agency had started to give 
more attention to nuclear safety issues. The safety of nuclear reactors and the safety of the 
transport of nuclear and radioactive materials were as important as non-proliferation and 
safeguards. A reasonable balance had to be struck between technical co-operation activities 
and safeguards and safety issues. Developing countries in particular should be given adequate 
Agency support in developing their peaceful nuclear technology for use in areas such as 
energy, medicine, agriculture and the environment, which were vital to their economic 
development. Unless the Agency increased technical co-operation for the transfer of nuclear 
technology to developing countries, the gap between the rich and poor would widen causing a 
serious setback to the global economic integration objectives of the year 2000. 
52. Turkey was committed to the principles of non-proliferation and the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. It had been one of the early signatories of the NPT and CTBT and had 
submitted the text of the latter to parliament for ratification. She had also had the honour of 
chairing the Joint Consultative Group on IAEA/CTBTO Co-operation. Turkey was a party to 
the Chemical and Biological Weapons Conventions and had joined the Missile Technology 
Control Regime in April 1997. In addition, it was a full member of the Wassenaar 
Arrangement and was in the process of joining the Nuclear Suppliers Group. It was also a 
member of INIS, the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD and an observer at CERN. 
53. In parallel with those commitments, the Turkish Government was taking steps to 
promote peaceful nuclear energy in the country. The Turkish Atomic Energy Agency was 
carrying out nuclear technology studies. The national model reactor which had been planned, 
using indigenous sources as far as possible, would have an important role in the transfer of 
nuclear technology to Turkey. Quality assurance studies in relation to the safety of the 
planned nuclear power plant, on media information and on advanced non-destructive 
technology were also under way. Nuclear methods were also being used in Turkey in many 
areas, including health, the environment, radiopharmaceuticals and agriculture. 
54. Turkey had always strictly abided by the provisions of the NPT and consistently 
encouraged all countries to accede with a view to giving greater weight to the appeal to 
nuclear-weapon States for rapid and effective progress in the field of nuclear disarmament. 
However, although there were currently 186 States Parties to the NPT, there were still some 
States which, for one reason or another, preferred not to join the non-proliferation regime, 
thereby creating a serious threat to international peace and security in general. 
55. Turkey deeply regretted the nuclear weapons tests in South Asia in May and remained 
concerned about the regional and global implications of those tests. In that connection, it 
associated itself with those countries which had called on India and Pakistan to adhere to the 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 13 


NPT and the CTBT as soon as possible and to solve their bilateral problems through 
negotiations. 


56. That development had indicated once again the need to establish nuclear-weapon-free 
zones wherever possible and feasible. As the establishment of such zones had a direct bearing 
on the security of States within their defined regions and on the existing military balance, the 
desire to establish them had to come from all the States concerned, with strict observance of 
the principle of undiminished security. Furthermore, the presence or absence of other 
weapons of mass destruction, including chemical and biological weapons, and the prevailing 
political atmosphere in the region were relevant factors which should be taken into 
consideration by all the States concerned. 
57. The establishment in Geneva of an ad hoc committee to negotiate a treaty banning the 
production of fissile material for nuclear weapons, with the participation of States committed 
to non-proliferation, including Pakistan, was an important milestone. Such a treaty would 
result in new verification tasks for the Agency. In that context, Turkey supported the idea of 
establishing a special fund in the Agency to finance future verification activities associated 
with a fissile material cut-off treaty. 
58. Turkey had been strongly in favour of increasing the effectiveness and the efficiency of 
the Agency's safeguards system and had played an active role in the negotiations on the 
Model Additional Protocol. It had already initiated negotiations with the Secretariat for an 
additional protocol and welcomed the conclusion of additional protocols by ten other 
countries. 
59. Illicit trafficking in nuclear material was an important issue for the Agency. The 
Turkish delegation had repeatedly stated in meetings of the Board and the General Conference 
that illicit trafficking had a transboundary dimension and that measures at the national level 
alone could not solve the problem. The international aspects of the problem could only be 
addressed through a binding international instrument covering all aspects of illicit trafficking, 
bearing in mind in particular that the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear 
Material was not binding. A binding instrument would commit the parties to ensuring the 
control and security of radioactive sources and reporting any losses or thefts of such sources to 
the Agency. To underline the importance of the issue, Turkey had proposed in the Preparatory 
Committee for the 2000 NPT Review Conference that the Committee should include in its 
report an invitation to all States with nuclear materials on their territory to accede to the 
Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and a call to all States to start 
immediately, and conclude at the earliest possible date, negotiations on a new, legally binding 
international instrument controlling illicit trafficking in nuclear materials. In that context, the 
meeting of the ad hoc committee established by General Assembly resolution A/RES/51/210 
to negotiate a convention for the suppression of acts of nuclear terrorism had provided a new 
opportunity for considering measures to combat illicit nuclear trafficking, which was an 
extremely important aspect of nuclear terrorism. 
60. The issue of adequate water supply and the sustainable development and preservation of 
the quality of existing scarce resources had attracted the attention of United Nations agencies 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 14 


and relevant international, regional, governmental and non-governmental organizations. In 
that connection, the Agency was already taking action to promote the more extensive use of 
isotope hydrology to produce a visible socio-economic impact on the assessment, 
development and management of water resources at the national, regional and international 
levels, as recommended by several previous sessions of the General Conference. The creation 
of centres of excellence in different regions to provide the necessary support for the more 
effective implementation of the technical co-operation programme and to achieve long-term 
sustainability in nuclear applications would certainly contribute substantially to that goal. 
Turkey hoped that the laboratory established in 1965 in Ankara with full-scale analytical 
capabilities for isotope applications in the water and environmental sectors could be 
considered as such a centre. 

61. The safe transport of radioactive material was an issue which should be of concern to all 
States through which radioactive waste was transported by land, sea or air. The 
internationally recognized right of innocent passage, which was of utmost importance and 
utility to all countries, could clearly not overshadow the right of human beings to live in a safe 
environment and precautionary measures should therefore be taken both by the transporting 
and transit States to protect people and the environment. The only way to ensure such safe 
transport was for all States both inside and outside the Agency to observe the same rules and 
regulations. 
62. As a follow-up to the previous year's work, the Conference was to be asked to adopt the 
report of the Secretariat on legally binding and non-binding international instruments and 
regulations concerning the safe transport of radioactive materials and their implementation. 
That report also drew attention to the inadequacies of the system. Efforts should consequently 
be made to find ways and means of making the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport 
of Radioactive Material universally applicable and binding on all States. To that end, 
interested countries, including Turkey, had submitted a draft resolution to the Conference 
containing a programme of action to make implementation of the Transport Regulations more 
effective and universal. Turkey was well aware that many Member States were sensitive 
about that crucial issue, but was confident that the draft resolution would obtain the support it 
merited. 
63. Mr. KADRI (Algeria) pointed out that, in a rapidly changing world, the Agency 
had demonstrated its ability to adjust and rise to new challenges, while continuing to respond 
to the legitimate demands of the developing countries for technical co-operation and 
assistance for development through the increased use of nuclear energy for peaceful purposes. 
Algeria had benefited from high-quality Agency support for economic and social projects 
under the technical co-operation programme. Africa as a whole had made a considerable 
effort to implement the technical co-operation strategy, as witnessed by the high project 
implementation ratio of over 80%. Algeria had recorded a ratio of over 90% per cent and had 
taken due account of the technical co-operation strategy pursued by the Agency in preparing 
its requests for technical assistance in the period from 2000 to 2002. It was important that the 
technical co-operation programme should keep pace with advances in the use of nuclear 
technology. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 15 


64. Algeria attached the utmost importance to the issue of the financing of technical 
co-operation and welcomed the re-establishment of a working group in the Board of 
Governors to study ways and means of making the resources for financing the technical cooperation 
programme predictable and assured and to establish indicative planning figures for 
the next cycle. Algeria had approved the change from a three-year to a two-year cycle and 
found it logical that the Regular Budget cycle should coincide with the TCF planning cycle. 
However, the target figure for 1999 and 2000, which had been frozen at $73 million, fell far 
short of technical co-operation requirements. The targets for 2001 and 2002 should therefore 
be increased by a considerable amount, given the flexibility that the developing countries had 
displayed regarding the first two years of the cycle. 

65. The Agency's Member States had a moral duty to ensure that the financing of the 
technical co-operation programme was predictable and assured. While the recipient countries 
certainly bore considerable responsibility for technical co-operation activities, an even larger 
share of responsibility lay with the donor countries. A joint effort by all concerned was 
therefore necessary to ensure that a vital component of the Agency's mandate - promotion of 
the peaceful use of nuclear energy - was successfully implemented. 
66. The application of safeguards was another cornerstone of the Agency's mandate and 
Algeria, as a party to the NPT, had concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency and 
entered into negotiations concerning subsidiary arrangements. It had also been involved in the 
negotiations on the Model Additional Protocol to safeguards agreements, an important step 
that had appropriately coincided with the establishment of the Preparatory Commission for the 
CTBTO and had contributed to the enhancement of the non-proliferation regime. Algeria 
intended in due course to commence negotiations with the Agency on an additional protocol. 
67. His country was also a party to the Pelindaba Treaty establishing a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in Africa and fully supported the States that were endeavouring to establish a similar 
zone in the Middle East. The fact that a single State stood in the way of that project was a 
problem not only for the Middle East, but also for Africa whose nuclear-weapon-free zone 
served little purpose if its neighbours failed to follow suit. Algeria was extremely concerned 
about Israel's obdurate attitude to the international community and its persistent refusal to 
accede to the NPT and place its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. The international 
community should abandon its policy of double standards, which undermined the credibility 
of its efforts to free the world from weapons of mass destruction. 
68. Algeria had registered with regret the recent nuclear tests in South Asia, which had 
demonstrated the need for more resolute action to achieve the aims of disarmament, including 
the elimination of nuclear weapons. In that connection, Algeria endorsed the final declaration 
on disarmament and international co-operation adopted at the NAM Summit held recently in 
Durban, South Africa. Although the NPT remained the cornerstone of the non-proliferation 
regime, it had hitherto failed to achieve the basic goal of full and comprehensive disarmament. 
Algeria believed that nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear disarmament were two closely 
related issues and reaffirmed the dual proposal it had made to the Disarmament Commission 
for the establishment of a special committee on nuclear disarmament and a special committee 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 16 


on the prohibition of the production of fissile material for the manufacture of nuclear 
weapons. 


69. The amendment of Article VI of the Statute had long been a matter of concern for a 
large number of States and he appreciated the efforts of the Chairman of the Board of 
Governors to reach a compromise solution. Twenty-two years previously, Algeria had 
stressed the need to expand the membership of the Board in order to reflect changing 
circumstances and make the Agency more democratic and universal, and it fully endorsed the 
position of the Africa Group on the issue at the current session. It might be helpful, however, 
to draw attention to a number of points of particular relevance. The Agency had amended 
Article VI in 1970 to increase the number of Board members from 25 to 34 and again in 1984 
to enable China to occupy a seat. A number of African States had recently applied for 
membership of the Agency and in that connection he welcomed the admission of Benin. As a 
result, the Africa Group was now the largest group and would undoubtedly grow further in the 
near future. If no amendment were made, it was conceivable that 50 African States would be 
obliged to share two elective seats in the Board of Governors, a clear case of underrepresentation. 
While Algeria was ready and willing to work for a compromise solution, it 
was committed to the African proposal, which faithfully reflected the aspirations of the 
overwhelming majority of the States that had given it their support. 
70. The idea of a linkage between different components of the Article VI issue had been 
conjured up for the benefit of an individual State. It was an unreasonable and unjustified 
position and the entire international community was being held hostage as a result. The 
membership of a regional group should be determined by the group itself and there was no 
justification for imposing a particular country on its members, especially when that country 
had neither acceded to the NPT nor placed all its nuclear facilities under Agency safeguards. 
Besides, everyone was well aware of the current situation in the Middle East, where the peace 
process had ground to a halt. It was that situation which had prompted the Arab States to 
request the inclusion of the item entitled "Israeli nuclear capabilities and threat" in the agenda 
of the General Conference. The capabilities in question posed a real threat to peace and 
security both within the region and beyond, and should be a source of concern not only to the 
Arab States but to all members of the international community. Israel's accession to the NPT 
and the placing of all its facilities under Agency supervision would constitute a major step 
towards the achievement of a just and lasting peace in the Middle East and, conversely, its 
refusal to do so constituted a rejection of peace. 
71. With regard to the participation of Palestine in the work of the Agency, he urged the 
Conference to upgrade its status at least to the level specified in General Assembly 
resolution 52/250 of 7 July 1998. 
72. Algeria was committed to applying strict nuclear, radiation and waste safety standards to 
all nuclear activities in nuclear installations and research laboratories and to activities 
involving the use of radioactive materials. It had acceded to the Convention on Nuclear 
Safety and had recently established an Atomic Energy Commission whose programme of 
priorities included the consideration of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel 
Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management and the Convention on 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 17 


Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage. Algeria also planned to establish the 
various organizational and safety mechanisms provided for in Agency instruments and to 
strengthen existing mechanisms. 


73. Lastly, he announced that Algeria intended shortly to pay its financial contribution to the 
Agency's Regular Budget for the current year and its contribution to the TCF for the year 
ahead. 
74. Mr. VAJDA (Hungary), having endorsed the statement made by Austria on behalf 
of the European Union and associated countries, including Hungary, said that, in spite of 
certain recent undesirable developments in the nuclear field, there had been clear progress in 
strengthening international relations in order to ensure that nuclear energy was used only for 
peaceful purposes and for the benefit of mankind. Efforts to strengthen the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime had played a key role in that regard. 

75. Since the Agency's safeguards remained a fundamental element of the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime, Hungary welcomed the Agency's elaboration of a strengthened 
safeguards system and its efforts to negotiate and conclude additional protocols with Member 
States. Hungary had already started negotiations with the Agency on an additional protocol 
and intended to conclude them at an early date and submit the additional protocol to 
parliament for ratification. It also intended to continue its Agency safeguards support 
programme. 
76. The Hungarian Government welcomed the recent decision by the Conference on 
Disarmament to create an ad hoc committee to negotiate a fissile material cut-off treaty which, 
when concluded, would be an important step towards strengthening the nuclear 
non-proliferation regime. The Agency should provide assistance in drawing up and 
implementing the verification arrangements for such a treaty. That would be a challenging 
task for the Agency in terms of the probable scope and financial implications of the 
verification arrangements, and Member States should therefore provide the necessary political 
support and financial resources. 
77. The approach of the twenty-first century brought new challenges and there were several 
areas where international consensus was still lacking, such as safety, liability, radioactive 
waste and public acceptance of nuclear energy. Nevertheless, an international regime on 
nuclear and radiation safety had emerged during the 1990s, as demonstrated by the legally 
binding international conventions, globally agreed international safety standards and 
provisions for facilitating the application of those standards. The Convention on Nuclear 
Safety would help to focus the nuclear community's attention on safety issues and in that 
context Hungary was looking forward to the forthcoming organizational meeting of the 
Contracting Parties to the Convention on Nuclear Safety. As stated in its national report to be 
submitted to that meeting, Hungary had made nuclear safety a top priority and had fulfilled all 
the conditions stipulated in the Convention. 
78. It had been repeatedly affirmed that a technically competent, independent regulatory 
authority with adequate resources was a central element in maintaining nuclear safety in each 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 18 


country. As part of its efforts to enhance nuclear safety, Hungary had taken steps to improve 
its regulatory system and established a new legal framework that was in line with the latest 
international standards. In doing so, it had received assistance from the Agency, the European 
Union and Member States. In that connection, Hungary wished to invite the Agency to 
conduct an IRRT mission in order to give assistance in further improving regulatory practice 
in Hungary. 


79. The Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management was another recent major achievement. It had already been 
signed and ratified by Hungary, whose new Atomic Energy Act conformed fully to the Joint 
Convention's provisions. Under the Act, the Central Nuclear Financial Fund and a non-profit 
company had been set up. The Fund's exclusive purpose was to finance the construction and 
operation of facilities for the final disposal of radioactive waste, interim storage and final 
disposal of spent fuel, and decommissioning of nuclear facilities. Payments into the Fund had 
started on 1 January 1998 and, in the case of nuclear power plants, payments made to the Fund 
by the licensee were to be taken into account when pricing electricity. 
80. Hungary was making efforts also to increase transparency about its nuclear activities 
and, in that context, the Chairman of the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission was due to 
submit a comprehensive report to parliament on the safety of atomic energy applications. 
81. Nuclear energy remained an essential component of Hungary's energy supply and the 
Paks nuclear power plant continued to perform well in terms of both electricity generation and 
commitment to safety. A periodic safety review of units 1 and 2 of the Paks plant had been 
completed and a review of units 3 and 4 had been started which would cover aspects of 
environmental impact and emergency planning for the whole site. 
82. Hungary, which was both a beneficiary of and contributor to the technical co-operation 
programme, welcomed the efforts made to improve the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities during the previous year. The recently launched Model Project to establish the 
Centre for Emergency Response, Training and Analysis (CERTA) for the Hungarian Atomic 
Energy Commission was of particular importance and Hungary appreciated the assistance 
received from the Agency, the European Union and the British Government in that regard. 
Hungary hoped to be able to test and demonstrate CERTA's operation in November, when it 
was to host an international emergency exercise (INEX-2). Hungary was keen to share the 
benefits of technical co-operation with other countries. It acted as a host country for the 
Agency's fellowship and training programme and intended to pledge its target contribution to 
the TCF for 1999. It urged other Member States to pay their shares on time. 
83. Finally, he noted that an international symposium on modernizing the liability regime 
for nuclear damage, organized by the NEA and the Hungarian Atomic Energy Commission, 
would be held in Hungary the following June and would provide an opportunity to work 
towards a global nuclear liability regime. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 19 

84. Mr. NGUYEN XUAN HONG (Viet Nam), having welcomed the Republic of 
Benin, said that his country strongly supported all the Agency's initiatives and efforts in the 
field of nuclear safety and radioactive waste management. Viet Nam had recently received 
assistance from the Agency, the Republic of Korea, Japan and other countries of the region in 
setting up a nuclear safety and radioactive waste management infrastructure. Viet Nam 
planned to introduce some 800-1000 MW of nuclear power capacity into its electricity 
generating system by 2010 or 2015. The demand for electricity by that time was expected to 
be in excess of 100 billion kWh. It was therefore important for a nuclear safety regulatory 
infrastructure to be established without delay in Viet Nam. With the assistance of Agency 
experts, a legal framework for radiation protection had been designed in compliance with the 
Agency's Basic Safety Standards. 
85. Viet Nam was grateful to the Agency, and in particular to its Department of Technical 
Co-operation, for providing assistance in nuclear applications in various sectors of the 
economy. They were increasingly needed not only in industry and agriculture, but also in the 
areas of health and environmental protection. Public acceptance of radiation technology after 
four years of operating the Hanoi Irradiation Centre had led the Government of Viet Nam to 
sponsor and to provide partial financing for an establishment in Ho Chi Minh City for the 
sterilization of medical products. 
86. Mr. AL-ATHEL (Saudi Arabia) said that optimists tended to focus on the 
enormous benefits to be gained from the peaceful use of nuclear energy. Others, more aware 
of its inherent dangers, focused on the enormous responsibilities it entailed in terms of 
ensuring high safety levels, guarding against its use for military purposes and freeing the 
world from nuclear weapons. The Agency had a fundamental role to play on both fronts. 
87. He thanked all participants in the Conference who had supported Saudi Arabia's 
candidacy for a seat on the Board of Governors and promised that his delegation would do its 
utmost to prove itself worthy of the confidence placed in it, representing the Middle East and 
South Asia Group, and working for just, realistic and practicable decision-making in the 
Board. 
88. Saudi Arabia regularly paid its contributions to the Regular Budget at the beginning of 
each year and it supported the Board's recommendations concerning the Agency's programme 
and the Regular Budget estimates for the years 1999 and 2000. With regard to the financing 
of technical co-operation and the difficulties in recent years in obtaining voluntary 
contributions to the TCF, Saudi Arabia was convinced that the problem could only be solved 
by financing the Fund in the same way as safeguards, in other words, through fixed and 
assured appropriations to the Regular Budget. He urged the Conference to give serious 
consideration to that option. The developing countries had pinned their hopes on the Agency 
as a body engaged in promoting the peaceful use of nuclear energy, especially as advances in 
science and technology increased the number and variety of its applications. The technical 
co-operation programme was an appropriate means of fulfilling those hopes. Saudi Arabia 
therefore supported the measures aimed at enhancing the effectiveness of the programme and 
trusted that the Conference would take steps to guarantee the requisite resources as soon as 
possible. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 20 


89. The General Conference had repeatedly addressed the issue of the amendment of 
Article VI of the Statute, but had unfortunately been unable to make any tangible progress. 
Saudi Arabia's position was based on a number of fundamental principles: expansion of the 
Board's membership to reflect recent developments and international realities as well as the 
circumstances of the regional groups; distribution of the seats in accordance with the size and 
role of the various regional groups; and giving all Member States the right to belong to a 
regional group following consultations with the members of the group concerned and without 
imposing any State on a group. 
90. The Agency was carrying out valuable work in the areas of safety and security, which 
helped to build public confidence in nuclear energy. Aspects covered included preparations 
for the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, the safe transport of radioactive 
materials, radioactive waste and spent fuel within and across national boundaries, and regional 
and international co-ordination of activities aimed at preventing illicit trafficking in 
radioactive materials, including training courses and exchanges of data. Saudi Arabia looked 
forward to more widespread implementation of the Programme for Preventing and Combating 
Illicit Trafficking in Nuclear Materials adopted at the Denver Summit of the Group of Eight. 
91. The Conference documents and statements by previous speakers indicated a desire to 
expand the verification component of the Agency's work. While he understood the arguments 
of those who advocated such a policy, he found it difficult to support them fully at a time 
when the Agency was having trouble financing its development function. 
92. The Agency had been working for many years to strengthen the effectiveness and 
improve the efficiency of the safeguards system with a view to detecting undeclared nuclear 
activities. Its most recent achievement had been the approval by the Board of the Model 
Additional Protocol on 15 May 1997. Saudi Arabia had supported the initiatives concerned 
and called for their implementation provided that the costs incurred were not at the expense of 
technical assistance and co-operation or the transfer of nuclear technology and its use for 
peaceful purposes. 
93. Saudi Arabia encouraged all States to accede to the NPT and to conclude safeguards 
agreements with the Agency with a view to building mutual confidence and strengthening 
international security. However, the Agency's credibility and indeed the whole safeguards 
system would be undermined if it abandoned the principle of universality and yielded to 
attempts to exempt certain States. 
94. With regard to the application of Agency safeguards in the Middle East, the existence in 
the region of nuclear activities that were not intended for peaceful purposes was common. 
knowledge. Moreover, the originator of those activities had not acceded to the NPT and 
refused to conclude a safeguards agreement with the Agency, thus impeding progress towards 
peace and stability in the region. Mutual confidence was not built on words alone but on 
corresponding action. There was a long way to go before a zone free of weapons of mass 
destruction could be established in the Middle East, but he trusted that the parties concerned 
would remain steadfast and that their perseverance would ultimately bear fruit. Saudi Arabia 
felt that the Agency could play a more active role in that connection than hitherto. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 21 


95. Mr. BENAVIDES (European Commission) expressed full support for the views 
expressed on behalf of the European Union, particularly with regard to the threat posed by the 
nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan and the strong message conveyed to those 
countries. He also supported the important steps taken towards the negotiation of a fissile 
material cut-off treaty. 
96. Countries which were candidates for European Union membership were currently 
involved in a comprehensive screening process that would enable them to identify the areas 
where their national legislation needed to be brought into line with the European Union's 
legal framework. The energy sector had its place in those negotiations, and the candidate 
States with nuclear power plants - the overwhelming majority of which were of basic Russian 
design - would be making firm commitments regarding nuclear safety and continuing with 
their efforts to bring their legislation in the areas of radiation protection, safety and radioactive 
waste management into line with that of the European Union. 
97. In the past year, there had been two very significant developments in energy policy: the 
Kyoto agreement of December 1997 on greenhouse gas emission reductions and the European 
Union gas directive of May 1998 in which the European gas market would progressively be 
opened up to greater competition. In achieving the Kyoto commitments, nuclear energy 
would clearly continue to play a very important role and complement policy initiatives in 
other areas such as energy efficiency and the renewable energies. The European Union's 
Energy Framework Programme would bring all energy activities with a financial implication 
at European Union level within a single framework in order to improve their transparency and 
effectiveness in contributing to the achievement of European Union energy goals. 
98. The New Partnership Approach under which EURATOM and the Agency implemented 
safeguards in the European Union had continued to operate successfully. The European 
Commission was pleased to note that just over a year after the adoption of the Model 
Additional Protocol, the Board of Governors and the Council of Ministers of the European 
Union had approved the conclusion of additional protocols to the three existing agreements 
between the 13 non-nuclear-weapon States of EURATOM, EURATOM and the Agency; 
France, EURATOM and the Agency; and the United Kingdom, EURATOM and the Agency. 
That had opened the way for signature of the three additional protocols in Vienna 
on 22 September 1998. That rapid achievement had required the resolution of a number of 
political, institutional, legal and technical issues in which the Agency's Secretariat had made 
an invaluable contribution. The European Commission believed that in an integrated 
safeguards system it would be possible for the Agency to move away from mechanical 
criteria-driven safeguards in States which implemented fully the strengthening measures and 
to devolve those responsibilities to a regional system, and it was ready to work with the 
Agency to identify the best way of achieving that in the European Union. 
99. The European Commission and the EURATOM Supply Agency were of the opinion 
that the uranium and enrichment components of the materials derived from the dismantling of 
nuclear warheads in the Russian Federation resulting from the agreement with the United 
States of America had to be introduced in the world market in a stable and predictable manner 
without jeopardizing the viability of the necessary primary production. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 22 


100. Turning to nuclear safety, he said that the European Union contributed to the continued 
development of a worldwide nuclear safety culture through the nuclear safety research 
programmes carried out in Member States and at the European Union's Joint Research Centre 
and through the continued search for consensus within the Union on safety requirements and 
procedures through the Commission's standing advisory expert group on nuclear safety. The 
main orientation of the European Union's programmes of assistance to the countries of 
Central and Eastern Europe had been to support and accelerate safety enhancement 
programmes for nuclear power plants. A budget of 80 million ECU had been allocated 
in 1997 for projects in the nuclear safety field within the TACIS and PHARE assistance 
programmes. Overall, there had been a contribution of 100 million ECU to the G-7 action 
plan for Ukraine, which addressed sensitive issues related to the shutting down of the 
Chernobyl nuclear power plant, the safety of the Unit 4 shelter and the achievement of an 
acceptable safety level at the two units under construction at Rovno and Khmelnitski. The 
European Union would also be making a contribution of $100 million to the Chernobyl 
Shelter Fund. 
101. The European Union's Joint Research Centre was carrying out research in a number of 
important fields. In the case of basic actinide research, which was important for the fuel cycle 
and waste management, work focused particularly on the electronic structure of those actinide 
elements and compounds that were attracting increasing interest owing to their peculiar 
chemical and solid-state properties. In the field of advanced materials, research was directed 
to the development of innovative processing and testing methods. 
102. There had been a number of developments in the area of co-operation between 
EURATOM and specific countries: the co-operation agreement for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy between EURATOM and the Government of Argentina, signed in June 1996, 
had entered into force in October 1997; an agreement for co-operation in the area of nuclear 
research between EURATOM and Canada had recently been concluded; negotiations on an 
agreement between EURATOM and Japan for co-operation in the peaceful uses of nuclear 
energy were expected to begin in the near future; and, since September 1997, EURATOM had 
been a member of the Executive Board of KEDO and had been playing its role in contributing 
to achieving peace, stability, reconciliation and furtherance of non-proliferation goals on the 
Korean Peninsula. Furthermore, the European Commission was implementing, under the 
TACIS programme, an important collaborative effort with the Russian Federation to support 
the implementation of the new safeguards approach in that country. 
103. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon) stressed that, in a rapidly changing world, it was 
essential for the Agency to keep pace with scientific and technological developments and 
discharge its constantly growing responsibilities and workload effectively and efficiently. 
That called, inter alia, for an expansion of the Board of Governors to make it more 
representative, the use of more advanced verification and monitoring techniques in 
implementing the safeguards system, and the promotion of modern technology to facilitate 
energy production while protecting the environment. 
104. It was through technical co-operation that the Agency fulfilled one of its most important 
tasks, namely promotion of the peaceful use of nuclear energy for development. For that 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 23 


purpose, a clear-cut strategy was necessary based on the concept of "Partners in 
Development", the aim of which was to enhance the role of nuclear science and technology in 
achieving sustainable development in Member States. The developing countries urgently 
needed assistance in consolidating their infrastructure for nuclear safety, radiation protection, 
waste disposal, environmental protection and management of natural resources. Training was 
also a key requirement for developing national and regional capabilities, especially practical 
training that took Member States' priorities into account. 

105. Lebanon was in favour of combining activities financed from extrabudgetary resources 
with those financed from the Regular Budget or the TCF in order to improve programme 
management. It had participated in technical co-operation activities during the previous year 
and in pilot projects in the areas of infrastructure improvement, radiation protection, 
monitoring of rinderpest in West Asia, nuclear medicine, and the use of isotope hydrology in 
water resource management. In addition, Lebanon had contributed $100 000 to a cost-sharing 
project for the purchase of a Van de Graaff accelerator which would markedly enhance its 
capability to analyse a number of industrial and environmental materials. Considerable 
progress had also been made in a project using the sterile insect technique to combat fruit 
pests. 
106. Israel's possession of undeclared nuclear facilities that were not subject to international 
supervision posed a constant threat to peace and security in the Middle East. Its aggressive 
stance was an obstacle to progress in the peace process. Israel also continued to occupy 
Lebanese territory, oppressing the local civilian population through detention without trial, 
artillery bombardment, and destruction of homes and crops. The Agency, in its role as 
defender of the principle of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, should take firm measures 
to counter the Israeli nuclear threat by calling on Israel to accede to the NPT like all other 
States in the region and to place its facilities under Agency supervision. 
107. The establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the Middle East was a matter of 
urgency and he trusted that the Conference would adopt a strongly worded resolution, urging 
all parties concerned to take the requisite steps to achieve that aim, first and foremost by 
acceding to the NPT and concluding a safeguards agreement. 
108. Lebanon viewed the amendment of Article VI of the Statute as a necessary step to keep 
pace with changes in the international political situation and to reflect the growing 
membership of the Agency through fair representation of Member States in the Board of 
Governors. Linkage of the expansion of the Board with Israel's incorporation in the MESA 
Group was a move designed to obstruct the expansion process. The inclusion of any State in a 
regional group depended on its acceptance by the group concerned. Israel, which persistently 
refused to sit at the negotiating table with its neighbours, could not impose its presence on a 
particular geographical group. 
109. The Agency's safeguards system had been continuously evolving for the past 30 years. 
The adoption by the Board of the Model Additional Protocol laid the requisite legal basis for 
enhancing the Agency's ability to detect undeclared nuclear materials and activities. He was 
pleased to note that 221 safeguards agreements had been concluded with 137 States as 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 24 


of 31 December 1997. However, the safeguards system would never be comprehensive until 
it covered all States. So long as there remained one State in the Middle East that had not 
concluded a safeguards agreement with the Agency or opened its nuclear facilities to 
inspection, a threat would continue to hang over the entire region. The Conference should 
therefore call on Israel yet again to place all its nuclear facilities under Agency supervision. 


110. The recent nuclear tests had stirred up fears of a return to the arms race and had turned 
the Agency, for the time being, into one of the most important international organizations. 
Great hopes were pinned on it as mankind sought to avert the danger posed by the 
proliferation of nuclear weapons. A concerted effort on the part of the Agency's Member 
States was needed to implement its principles and make its safeguards universal so that one 
day the world would finally be rid of all weapons of mass destruction. 
111. Mr. de OURO-PRETO (Brazil), after welcoming Benin to the Agency, said that 
the nuclear tests carried out in South Asia earlier that year had dealt a serious blow to the 
non-proliferation regime. The international community had expressed deep regret about those 
tests and had urged the countries concerned to sign the CTBT without conditions and to 
accede to the NPT. In an international environment where economic crisis was prevalent, the 
task of reinforcing world security through non-proliferation and disarmament had acquired 
renewed urgency. Brazil did not believe that nuclear weapons helped enhance the security of 
any nation. The Brazilian President had recently stated that economic competitiveness, social 
cohesion and well-founded democratic institutions were what was needed for a country to play 
a positive and influential international role. Brazil's own recent ratification of the CTBT and 
its accession to the NPT reinforced its commitment to the strengthening of the 
non-proliferation regime as well as its credentials as a reliable partner in the struggle for a 
world with more peace and security, social progress and economic development. 
112. Effective measures to prevent nuclear proliferation and bring about complete 
disarmament would go a long way to enhancing world security. That was the main message 
of the declaration subscribed to by Brazil and seven other countries entitled "Towards a 
Nuclear-Weapon-Free World: The Need for a New Agenda", issued in June 1998. It was his 
country's firm belief that the number of nuclear Powers should not increase. Brazil welcomed 
the progress made under the START agreements between the United States and Russia on the 
reduction and limitation of strategic offensive arms and the unilateral reductions made by 
other nuclear-weapon States. Although all augured well for the start of negotiations on a 
fissile material cut-off treaty at the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, it seemed 
improbable that the world would be free of nuclear weapons in the near future. 
113. With regard to safeguards, the adoption of the Model Additional Protocol represented a 
significant step forward in strengthening the Agency's verification system. During the five 
years in which it had been in operation, ABACC's technical capability had been gradually 
improving and ABACC had helped to improve confidence in the international safeguards 
system. The Co-operation Agreement between the Agency and ABACC, concluded in 
May 1998, would do much to improve the co-ordination of activities between the two 
organizations and would result in more efficiency and effectiveness in the application of 
safeguards in Brazil and Argentina. 

GC(42)/OR.5 
page 25 


114. For Brazil, 1998 had brought further outstanding developments in the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy, including progress on the Angra-2 nuclear power plant, which was expected to 
start generating electricity in 1999, the implementation of the nuclear fuel cycle on an 
industrial scale, the production of 20% enriched uranium, a significant increase in the 
production of radioisotopes for medical, industrial and scientific purposes and the adoption of 
a decentralized approach in the Brazilian nuclear sector. 
115. In connection with nuclear safety, a number of actions were being taken to reassure the 
public about the safety of nuclear energy and to meet Brazil's international commitments 
under the Convention on Nuclear Safety. The number of inspections of nuclear and radiation 
facilities had been increased and a system had been established for financing radiation 
protection and nuclear safety. 
116. Regarding the social uses of nuclear energy, consistent investment in nuclear medicine 
over the past few years had resulted in a significant increase in the production of 
radiopharmaceuticals. The public had benefited and the latest figures indicated that more than 
1.5 million patients in Brazil were now being treated with radiopharmaceuticals. 
117. In conclusion, he emphasized the major importance of the Agency's dual role in 
fostering all the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and in preventing proliferation to ensure a 
more developed and safer world for present and future generations. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.6 
19 January 1999 
GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 
GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SIXTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Wednesday, 23 September 1998, at 3.10 p.m. 

President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 
Later: Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) 
Mr. MEER (United States of America) 

CONTENTS 

Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 

7 General debate and annual report for 1997 (continued) 1-171 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Syrian Arab Republic 1-9 
Spain 10-25 
Qatar 26-30 
Israel 31-40 
Ecuador 41-44 
Malaysia 45-53 
Philippines 54-65 
Poland 66-76 
Kuwait 77-83 
Ghana 84-92 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 
98-03472 (XXXIX) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 

Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 


GC(42)/OR.6 
page 2 


CONTENTS 
(Contd.) 


Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 93 - 95 

New Zealand 96-102 

Netherlands 103-110 

Zambia 111-119 

Mexico 120-132 

Lithuania 133-140 

Peru 141 -151 

Estonia 152-159 

Zimbabwe 160-168 

Afghanistan 169-171 


AFRA 


Agreed Framework 


ARCAL 


ASEAN 
ASSET 
CTBT 
CTBTO 
DPRK 
FAO 
IEA 
ILO 
EPF 
IRRT 
IRS 
KEDO 
Kyoto Conference 


MESA 
NEA 
NPT 


NPT Review 


Conference 
OECD 
OSART 
RCA 


TCF 
Trilateral Initiative 


UNEP 
UNSCOM 
WHO 


GC(42)/OR.6 
page 3 


Abbreviations used in this record 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Agreed Framework between the United States of America and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Analysis of Safety Significant Events Team 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
ComprehensiveNuclear-Test-BanTreaty Organization 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations 
International Energy Agency 
International Labour Organization 
Indicative Planning Figure 
International Regulatory Review Team 
Incident Reporting System 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
Third Conference of the Parties to the 1992 United Nations Framework 
Convention on Climate Change 
Middle East and South Asia 
Nuclear Energy Agency (of OECD) 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Review Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation 

of Nuclear Weapons 
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development 
Operational Safety Review Team 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Trilateral Initiative launched by the Minister of the Russian Federation 
for Atomic Energy, the Secretary of Energy of the United States and the 
Agency's Director General on 17 September 1996 to consider practical 
measures for the application of IAEA verification to fissile material 
originating from nuclear weapons 
United Nations Environment Programme 
United Nations Special Commission 
World Health Organization 


GC(42)/OR.6 
page 5 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (continued) 
(GC(42)/5) 


1. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) congratulated Benin on its admission to 
the Agency. Turning to the issue of Israel's nuclear capabilities and threat, he said that in 
requesting that item's inclusion again in the agenda, the Arab States were seeking the 
adoption of a clear resolution on the threat posed by Israel's nuclear capabilities for the 
security of the Middle East and, consequently, for world stability and security. The peace 
process had been in deadlock since the current Israeli Government had reneged on all the 
commitments undertaken by the previous Government and had undermined all international 
initiatives. 
2. Israel, which claimed to agree to the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East, had never taken any initiative to prove its good faith. On the contrary, it 
continued to defy the world community by refusing to accede to the NPT and to place its 
nuclear facilities under comprehensive Agency safeguards. Israel's nuclear armament policy 
had not been the result of any nuclear arms race, since all the States in the region, with the 
exception of Israel, had signed the NPT and had concluded safeguards agreements with the 
Agency. In fact, Israel's policy was in line with its expansionistic and hegemonistic aims. 
The international community should not stand by and watch while the Israeli nuclear arsenal 
expanded. After having been the subject of numerous General Conference resolutions, South 
Africa had eventually renounced its nuclear option, thereby permitting the establishment of a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone in Africa. He therefore called on the international community to 
exert pressure on Israel. That vital issue had to be addressed by the General Conference, for 
no departure from the rule should be allowed in such a sensitive case with such profound 
implications for regional security. 
3. With regard to the application of IAEA safeguards in the Middle East, he said that 
previous resolutions did not reflect present-day political realities. The references in paragraph 
4 of resolution GC(41)/RES/25 to the ongoing bilateral peace process and to the activities of 
the multilateral working group on arms control and regional security distorted the facts and 
were misleading to the international community, hi reality, the peace process had been 
paralysed for years because of the current Israeli Government's obstinate refusal to honour the 
commitments entered into by the previous Government. As for the multilateral working 
group, its activities had been placed on hold since the suspension of the peace negotiations. 
4. While he was grateful to the Director General for his efforts, he was surprised that in 
paragraph 5 of document GOV/1998/45-GC(42)/15, the Director General indicated that Israel 
attached importance to the CTBT but did not mention the fact that some States of the Middle 
East had signed additional protocols to their comprehensive safeguards agreements in the past 
year and that some had already committed themselves to establishing a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone in Africa. The failure to name Israel clearly in resolution GC(41)/RES/25 merely 
confirmed that double standards were being applied. It was time to amend the text so as to 
reflect present realities. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 6 


5. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he said that linking the issue 
of expansion of the Board with that of the composition of regional groups would only further 
hamper the settlement of the issue, which had been under consideration for over two decades. 
Resolution GC(39)/RES/22 clearly stated that the primary responsibility for deciding upon the 
composition of regional groups lay with the respective groups themselves and the Director 
General had explicitly stated in his report contained in document GC(40)/ll that the 
attribution of a State to a particular area was one in which factors other than geographical 
considerations played a role. The members of the Middle East and South Asia Group had 
rejected Israel's inclusion in the Group for objective reasons: Israel was occupying Arab 
lands, building settlements there and expelling the Arab populations with the use of violence. 
Israel refused all international initiatives to restart the peace process. Under such 
circumstances, no regional co-operation was possible and it was in fact the MESA Group and 
the Africa Group, and not Israel, as it alleged, that were being subjected to discrimination, in 
so far as their legitimate rights were being subjugated to the illegitimate interests of a single 
State. 
6. With regard to technical co-operation, while the reduction in resources for the TCF 
owing to non-payment or tardy payment of contributions explained why the "due account" 
provisions had been applied, he nevertheless had reservations about that approach. The 
Agency should rather encourage the main donors to pay their shares to the TCF under the 
commitment made to the developing countries within the framework of the NPT. 
7. hi 1997, West Asia had had the lowest project implementation rate and the Agency 
should do something about that problem. It should also allocate a higher portion of technical 
co-operation resources to the supply of equipment because of the difficulties faced by the 
developing countries in meeting their equipment needs. 
8. Judgement No. 1733 of the ELO's Administrative Tribunal, which declared the Agency's 
government sponsorship practice applied by the Agency since its inception as null and void, 
would deprive developing countries of the services of human resources trained on government 
fellowships. 
9. In conclusion, he emphasized the importance of co-operation between the Arab Atomic 
Energy Agency and the IAEA through regional co-operative projects and expressed the hope 
that such co-operation would be strengthened. 
10. Mr. GOMIS SAZ (Spain) welcomed the election of the Mexican Ambassador as 
President of the General Conference and paid tribute to Mr. ElBaradei, the Agency's new 
Director General, who had visited Spain on one of his first official trips. He fully endorsed 
the statement made by Austria on behalf of the European Union and welcomed Benin as a 
new member of the Agency. 
11. Reviewing the major events in the Spanish nuclear sector since the previous session of 
the General Conference, he said that in 1997, Spanish nuclear power plants had accounted for 
55 279 GWh, or 29.3% of the country's total electricity production. With an availability 
factor of 86.8%, the reliability level, which was among the highest in the world, had remained 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 7 


unchanged compared with previous years. Investments continued to be made in order to 
maintain the safety and reliability of nuclear power plants as well as to increase their 
production capacity. 


12. In November 1997, a new law had been adopted which radically modified the regulatory 
framework for electricity production and distribution, introducing a process of liberalization 
and competition in Spain that was unprecedented in Europe. Given that new development, 
Spanish nuclear power plants had to continue to optimize operating and maintenance costs in 
order to maintain current levels of availability without jeopardizing safety. 
13. With regard to radioactive waste management, the Senate Commission established in 
late 1996 to study the matter had heard the views of international experts and representatives 
of various organizations. The fact that its work was continuing longer than expected 
demonstrated the difficulties it was facing in reaching a consensus. Its conclusions, which 
were expected to be produced in the near future, would provide guidance to the Government 
in the search for more appropriate solutions to the problem of radioactive waste management. 
14. The Ministry of Industry and Energy had authorized the dismantling of unit 1 of the 
Vandellos nuclear power plant and transfer of its ownership to the national radioactive waste 
company, which was currently proceeding with the partial dismantling of the unit to level 2 
and which, after a waiting period of 30 years, would complete the dismantling work (level 3). 
The site could then be used for any purpose. 
15. Turning to the Agency's activities, he drew attention to the efforts made to strengthen 
the safeguards system. The adoption by the Board of Governors in May 1997 of the Model 
Additional Protocol represented significant progress. It was now up to Member States, 
particularly those that had nuclear installations, to negotiate and conclude additional protocols 
without delay, as Spain and the other members of the European Union had done. Reciprocity 
was the cornerstone of international safeguards. 
16. Spain had been one of the first countries to ratify the NPT, thereby reconfirming the 
importance it attached to the strengthening of the international system for the prevention of 
nuclear proliferation. The safeguards system would have to face a formidable new challenge 
in the years to come, with the voluntary submission to safeguards of large quantities of 
weapons-grade uranium and plutonium and of installations for the production of such 
materials. His delegation welcomed the consideration being given within the framework of 
the Trilateral Initiative to the technical, legal and financial problems posed by the verification 
of materials derived from nuclear weapons. Spain had also noted that the measures adopted 
so far in that area had been financed by voluntary contributions in order not to upset the 
Agency's Regular Budget, which was already constrained. 

17. With regard to nuclear safety and radiation protection, Spain was deeply committed to 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety and had done everything possible to ensure that its first 
national report reflected the implementation in Spain of its obligations arising from that 
Convention. The report would be submitted to the organizational meeting of the Contracting 
Parties scheduled for the following week. Spain hoped that the other parties would submit an 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 8 


honest analysis of the status in their countries and that countries with a high level of nuclear 
development which had not yet signed the Convention would do so before the first review 
meeting in 1999. 


18. Spain, which had signed the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management 
and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management in June 1998, had noted with 
satisfaction that progress was being made with the signature of that Convention and looked 
forward to contributing to the elaboration of the relevant rules and procedures. 
19. In the area of radiation protection and particularly the health effects of exposure to low 
doses of radiation, he drew attention to the international conference held in Seville, from 17 to 
21 November 1997 under the auspices of the Agency and WHO. The large number of 
participants - scientific specialists and health and nuclear safety officials - and the high quality 
of the technical reports attested to the international community's interest in the Conference. 
The lessons learnt would undoubtedly help to optimize the radiation protection of workers 
exposed to radiation and of the general public. 
20. Spain had continued to participate in the Agency's programmes to train the staff of 
regulatory bodies in the countries of the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe and had 
undertaken a new co-operative effort with the Agency to improve nuclear safety in the Far 
East. 
21. Spain attached great importance to the Agency's services in the field of nuclear safety 
through the IRS, and through OSART, ASSET and IRRT missions. The OSART mission 
carried out in June 1998 to the Asco nuclear power plant had demonstrated the absolute 
priority that Spain attached to the safety of its installations. 
22. He appealed to the international community to avert a repetition of events such as the 
one in May 1998 in one of his country's steelworks involving the melting of a caesium-137 
source which, while having had no radiological impact on the staff or the public, had required 
the mobilization of massive human and financial resources. At the International Conference 
on the Safety of Radiation Sources and the Security of Radioactive Materials, held at Dijon 
the previous week, Spain had put forward initiatives adopted in response to that incident with 
a view to improving the control at their destination of potentially radioactive or contaminated 
materials that were transported. Such improvements would be effective only if rigorous 
controls of radioactive sources were applied in the country of origin. In view of the frequency 
of such incidents throughout the world, his delegation called on the international community 
to study the transport of such materials in order to identify factors susceptible to control. 
23. Finally, with regard to technical co-operation activities, he welcomed the efforts made to 
make them more effective. The implementation of the technical co-operation strategy adopted 
by the Board of Governors would undoubtedly make it possible to maximize the contribution 
of nuclear energy to sustainable development. A concern for quality was essential, 
particularly at a time of overall budgetary restrictions. Spain had managed to maintain the 
level of its voluntary contribution to the TCF in 1997 and did not rule out an increase in that 
contribution in future within the limits of available budgetary resources. The decision to halt 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 9 


the increase of IPFs in real terms for 1999 and 2000 was a timely one. The substantial drop in 
the proportion of the target achieved proved that raising the IPFs indiscriminately and without 
regard to the evolution of the Agency's Regular Budget was not realistic. Owing to the 
voluntary nature of contributions, excessive growth in the IPFs was not accompanied by an 
increase in the resources of the TCF. 


24. In addition to its voluntary contribution to the TCF, Spain was contributing to the 
Agency's technical co-operation activities by hosting fellows and participants in courses, 
sending Spanish experts on technical assistance missions and supporting various projects. 
25. In conclusion, he said that his country supported the Agency's initiatives aimed at 
improving co-operation with other international organizations working in the same fields, 
particularly the Nuclear Energy Agency of the OECD. Such co-operation should result in 
more efficient use of Agency resources and, consequently, in greater advantages for Member 
States. 
26. Mr. AL-BOUANIN (Qatar) expressed satisfaction at Benin's admission to the 
Agency. Referring to the Director General's report on the application of Agency safeguards in 
the Middle East (GOV/1998/45-GC(42)/15), he said that, while Qatar was aware of the need 
for all countries in the Middle East without exception to accede to the NPT, it was greatly 
concerned at the setbacks in the peace process resulting from the repressive measures and acts 
of provocation by the Israeli Government, which continued to build settlements in the 
occupied Arab territories and sought to renege on the commitments made under the 
agreements concluded with the Palestinian Authority. Qatar emphasized the need to make a 
commitment to achieving overall peace, in accordance with United Nations Security Council 
and General Assembly resolutions. Member States should therefore provide greater assistance 
to the Director General to enable him to intensify his consultations with countries in the 
Middle East in order to ensure the full application of the safeguards system and to bring all the 
facilities in the region under the Agency's control. The conclusion of an agreement to 
establish a zone free of nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction in the Middle 
East would be a determining factor on the road to creating a climate of mutual trust and an 
important step towards a comprehensive, just and lasting peace in the region. 
27. The Arab Member States of the Agency, supported by the member countries of the 
Organization of the Islamic Conference, had asked for the item entitled "Israeli nuclear 
capabilities and threat" to be included again in the agenda because the strengthening of the 
Israeli nuclear arsenal represented a serious danger for all countries in the Middle East. The 
Arab countries had always shown their willingness to take specific measures with a view to 
establishing a zone free of weapons of mass destruction in the Middle East, while Israel 
continued to challenge the international community and refused to accede to the NPT and to 
make all its installations subject to comprehensive Agency safeguards. All Member States 
were therefore requested to take a firm stand in the face of that threat. 
28. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, the increase in the number of 
Member States meant that the issue of equitable representation of developing countries on the 
Board of Governors was more urgent than ever. As to the composition of regional groups, all 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 10 


the political factors at stake should be taken into account, with the relevant decisions being 
taken by the regional groups concerned. 


29. The Agency could play an important role in the application of the latest nuclear 
technologies to supply water to the populations in arid regions. In that connection, he was 
pleased to note that the projects for setting up facilities to produce drinking water by nuclear 
desalination, which were ecologically sound and economically competitive, had finally 
produced tangible results. 
30. As to technical co-operation, close examination of the figures relating to the resources 
allocated to West Asia revealed that the share received by Arab countries in that region was 
very small. Those countries relied heavily on the peaceful applications of nuclear energy in 
areas such as agriculture, health, environmental protection and food preservation in order to 
improve the living standards of their populations. The Agency was therefore invited to pay 
greater attention to that region and to strengthen the technical co-operation projects in those 
countries. Similarly, the industrialized countries were invited to honour their commitments 
with regard to the financing of the Agency's technical co-operation and technology transfer 
activities. 
Mr. Ryzhov (Russian Federation) took the Chair. 

31. Mr. FRANK (Israel), having congratulated Benin on its admission to the Agency, 
said that 1998 was a special year for Israel, since it marked the fiftieth anniversary of its 
independence. Nine years after its independence, true to its scientific and technological 
aspirations, Israel had become a founding member of the Agency. However, Israel was still 
subject to discrimination in the Agency's policy-making organs, since it was deprived of its 
legitimate right to participate in the activities of the region of which it formed part - the 
Middle East and South Asia - contrary to the principle of the sovereign equality of Member 
States enshrined in the Agency's Statute. Permitting any infringement of statutory rights was, 
in the long run, bound to undermine the essential basis on which Member States participated 
in the Agency's activities. 
32. While it appreciated the efforts made by the Chairman of the Board of Governors, Israel 
was disappointed that his proposal to advance the process of expanding the Board postponed 
indefinitely the approval of the assignment of Member States to regions. Although the 
proposal had the considerable merit of establishing a link between those two components, it 
fell short of maintaining the necessary balance between them. Israel would strongly oppose 
the expansion of the Board until each Member State fully enjoyed its sovereign statutory 
rights and until Israel was no longer deprived of its place in the MESA Group and of its right 
to serve on the Board. Nothing was more just, important and urgent than restoring the 
principle of sovereign equality in the Agency's policy-making organs. 
33. The General Conference was called upon to reconsider an obsolete item entitled "Israeli 
nuclear capabilities and threat", which had originally been included in the agenda at the 
request of Iraq and had been withdrawn in 1992. Since that time, numerous developments had 
taken place in the nuclear field: the sombre experience gained by UNSCOM and the Action 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 11 


Team; other dangerous proliferation initiatives in the Middle East and South Asia region; the 
DPRK crisis and other events known only too well to the General Conference. Israel was not 
involved in any of those events but, by contrast, had demonstrated exemplary self-restraint. It 
had neither threatened any of its neighbours, nor violated any international norm. There was 
no justification for putting the item back on the agenda and singling out Israel again. 

34. Israel's aim was to establish, in due course, the Middle East as a zone free of weapons 
of mass destruction and missiles. A nuclear-weapon-free zone should be established and 
supported by all the States concerned in the region. It could not be imposed. All States Party 
to the NPT had reaffirmed in such terms their support for those principles in 1995 in the 
document on the Principles and Objectives for Nuclear Non-Proliferation and Disarmament, 
in which it was stated that the establishment of internationally recognized nuclear-weaponfree 
zones, on the basis of arrangements freely arrived at among the States of the region 
concerned, enhanced global and regional peace and security. In the same document, the 
Parties also agreed that the development of nuclear-weapon-free zones, especially in regions 
of tension, such as in the Middle East, as well as the establishment of zones free of all 
weapons of mass destruction should be encouraged as a matter of priority, taking into account 
the specific characteristics of each region. The draft resolution before the General 
Conference, which grossly deviated from those agreed principles and objectives, would not 
change the situation prevailing in the region and was certainly counter-productive. The 
sponsors of the resolution openly admitted that their purpose was to coerce Israel into taking a 
decision essentially based on its national sovereignty, in clear contravention of the spirit of 
consensus. Delegates were therefore urged to oppose the draft resolution and to demonstrate 
their wish that the General Conference should not become an arena for political confrontation, 
or a venue for discrimination, since that ran counter to the Agency's statutory responsibilities 
and activities. 
35. International organizations were at their best when consensus prevailed among them. In 
that spirit, the General Conference was invited to consider the resolution on the application of 
IAEA safeguards in the Middle East, on the subject of which similar resolutions had been 
adopted by consensus since 1991. Despite the inherent deficiencies of those resolutions, Israel 
had joined the consensus in the past, because it recognized that the establishment, under the 
appropriate circumstances, of a regionally verifiable nuclear-weapon-free zone would 
eventually serve as a useful complement to the overall peace, security and arms control 
process in the region. 
36. From a more general point of view, Israel pinned its expectations on a security 
arrangement for the Middle East that would combine bilateral as well as multilateral elements. 
Inspired by the experience in Latin America and Asia as well as Europe, Israel was hopeful 
that proliferation problems would ultimately find their remedy through a combination of 
internal democratization and economic development, bilateral settlements and regional 
arrangements, such as those that had become commonplace in other regions. 
37. The nuclear issue could not realistically be dissociated from such a comprehensive 
framework of peace and security in any region. The vast experience accumulated with similar 
processes elsewhere had shown that such an overall setting was a necessary condition for 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 12 


disarmament and non-proliferation. Taken out of that context, formal NPT commitments for 
either self-restraint or nuclear export controls, even when coupled with Agency safeguards, 
could not by themselves provide adequate guarantees of compliance. The relevance of those 
two caveats was nowhere more apparent than in the Middle East. Tinkering with the text of 
the resolution adopted the previous year was bound to be dangerous and counter-productive, 
not least because it might engender false hopes that the regional process could be 
circumvented by manipulating resolutions in international bodies. 

38. hi principle, Israel supported the strengthening of safeguards and considered that the 
Model Protocol could contribute to such strengthening. While it was aware that in theory no 
verification could guarantee compliance with the agreements, the Israeli Government stressed 
that, at the end of the day, it was the political context and culture that provided the essential 
basis of any effective verification regime. The most instructive experience of recent years that 
in Iraq - should serve as a warning. Under certain conditions, the Model Protocol could 
substantially improve the safeguards system, but it could not guarantee compliance. Thus, 
special caution should be exercised. Although the Model Protocol did not apply to 
INFCIRC/66-type safeguards agreements, Israel intended to examine to what extent the 
measures contained therein were consistent with its policy and commitments in the area of 
safeguards. 
39. Tribute should be paid to the excellent work carried out by the Department of Technical 
Co-operation. Israel firmly believed that with regard to regional co-operation, the Agency 
could make an exceptional contribution that would meet both regional needs and help to build 
confidence. The medfly eradication technical co-operation project in the Middle East was a 
good example of fruitful regional co-operation. Additional topics for future consideration 
could include nuclear medicine, hydrology and food preservation. In that respect, Israel 
considered that even subregional initiatives could be beneficial, and it was willing to support 
such initiatives in its immediate neighbourhood with Jordan, Egypt and the Palestinian 
Authority. 
40. hi order to preserve the culture and spirit of the Agency, it was necessary to resist any 
attempt to impair its competence and impartiality, and to shield it from the debilitating effects 
of over-politicization. Indeed, political initiatives and energies should be channelled into 
further regional co-operation in the peaceful applications of nuclear energy. Israel looked 
forward to working with the Agency and hoped that, as in previous years, reason and 
moderation would prevail, and that the resolutions which the General Conference would adopt 
at its current session would strengthen the Agency in the pursuit of its objectives. 
41. Mr. SUAREZ (Ecuador) said that 1998 marked a turning point in the institutional 
life of the Ecuadorian Atomic Energy Commission (CEEA): it had undergone a complete 
change and made a 180 turn towards autonomy, self-management and total integration in the 
community. With a new statute, it was now dedicated to meeting the needs of national 
laboratories and to pure and applied research. 
42. Six ARCAL projects and four Model Projects under the Agency's technical 
co-operation programme were in progress. The CEEA, which had adopted the Partners in 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 13 


Development concept, had submitted three new Model Projects for the Agency's 
consideration in 1998, in strict conformity with the Agency's guidelines for planning and 
designing projects. 


43. Despite his country's great difficulties in paying its contribution arrears to the Agency, 
its intention was to settle them by 2003. 
44. Ecuador contributed to the battle against nuclear proliferation. Within the framework of 
the CTBTO, it was in the process of installing two nuclear test detection stations on the 
Galapagos islands. In that connection, he associated himself with the appeals to India and 
Pakistan to accede to the NPT and CTBT. He believed that nuclear weapons did not help to 
overcome poverty and that mutual trust was the best way of guaranteeing regional and 
international peace and security. 
45. Mr. HAJI HASHIM (Malaysia), after welcoming Benin as a new member, took 
note of the measures which the Director General had taken to strengthen the efficiency and 
effectiveness of the Agency and assured him of his country's full support. 
46. With regard to the financing of technical co-operation, the adoption of the new TCF 
planning cycle that would permit indicative planning figures to be determined every two years 
for a four-year period was a step in the right direction. However, the failure to recommend 
target figures for 2001 and 2002 was a step backwards. Malaysia therefore urged all Member 
States, particularly donors, to strive towards the implementation of the planning cycle adopted 
for the TCF and expressed appreciation to those which had paid their full share of the target 
and, in particular, to those which had made extrabudgetary contributions as well. Malaysia, 
for its part, would continue to pay its share of the target of the TCF. 
47. As both a recipient and donor State, Malaysia understood the need for the "due account" 
principle, but felt that it should only be applied taking into account the priority needs of 
developing Member States, with project quality being the overriding factor. Similarly, as far 
as Agency assistance was concerned, the graduation principle should be confined to the 
provision of major equipment and not to expert missions, training or fellowships. 
48. Malaysia was happy to continue to support the Agency's activities in the area of 
technology transfer. In May 1998 it had hosted an FAO/IAEA International Conference on 
Area-Wide Control of Insect Pests Integrating the Sterile Insect and Related Nuclear and 
Other Techniques. That conference had been held in conjunction with the Fifth International 
Symposium on Fruit Flies of Economic Importance. Over 300 participants from some 
70 countries, including 58 developing countries, and representatives of six international 
organizations, had attended the two meetings. 
49. With regard to nuclear safety and waste management, Malaysia fully subscribed to the 
conclusions of the last ASEAN expert working group meeting held in Manila (Philippines) 
from 26 to 28 August 1998. In addition to Agency co-operation mechanisms on nuclear safety 
and nuclear waste management, the participants in that meeting had recommended the 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 14 


establishment of a regional framework of co-operation to address the specific common 
problems of ASEAN member countries. 

50. With regard to the maritime transport of nuclear waste in particular, Malaysia welcomed 
the strengthening of regional co-operation to incorporate a procedure of prior notification and 
consent in the IMO Code for the Safe Carriage of Irradiated Nuclear Fuel, Plutonium and 
High Level Radioactive Wastes in Flasks on board Ships (INF Code). That code should be 
made mandatory to ensure that the maritime shipment of spent nuclear fuel or nuclear waste 
originating from or destined for countries outside the region occurred only with the prior 
consent of the transit States. 
51. Malaysia was concerned by the international community's failure to achieve a complete 
ban on nuclear testing and to prevent nuclear proliferation, as evidenced by the recent tests in 
South Asia. It was strongly opposed to nuclear testing and the continued possession of 
weapons of mass destruction. The importance of non-proliferation of nuclear weapons in 
achieving the universal goal of general and complete disarmament and enhancing peace and 
stability could not be over-emphasized. Moreover, nuclear-weapon States should demonstrate 
a stronger commitment to the goals of nuclear disarmament and the ultimate elimination of 
those weapons through a programme to reduce and eliminate their nuclear arsenals. It was to 
be hoped that all countries would actively participate in international efforts to achieve a 
nuclear-weapon-free world. 
52. Malaysia noted the recent decision of the United Kingdom to be the first 
nuclear-weapon State to declare the total size of its stocks of nuclear material, both civilian 
and military. With regard to the suggested establishment of a nuclear arms control 
verification fund under the aegis of the Agency, Malaysia looked forward to the financing 
options which the Director General intended to put forward, and hoped that the bulk of such 
funding would be borne by the nuclear-weapon States. 
53. As to the streamlining of the work of the General Conference, he welcomed document 
GC(42)/4 and the recommendations it contained. Almost ten years had passed since the last 
review of the working practices of the General Conference by an inter-sessional working 
group under the chairmanship of Ambassador Halim of Malaysia, who had been President of 
the thirty-second regular session of the General Conference. Malaysia appreciated in 
particular the proposals to focus discussions on certain themes, to cluster items and to 
envisage the biennial consideration of certain items. 
54. Mr. ZAIDE (Philippines), having welcomed Benin to the Agency, thanked the 
Director General for his statement and for the Annual Report for 1997, which reflected the 
excellent work done by the Secretariat. The current review of the Agency's programme, 
which was aimed at fine-tuning directions and priorities, was extremely interesting, and his 
delegation looked forward to the Medium Term Strategy paper which the Director General 
was preparing. 
55. The second ASEAN informal summit held in Kuala Lumpur in December 1997 had 
addressed the proposal of the former President of the Philippines, Mr. Ramos, for regional 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 15 


co-operation in nuclear safety and nuclear waste management. Following that initiative, an 
ASEAN group of experts meeting in Manila had recommended a framework for co-operation 
identifying potential initiatives in that area. The Agency should provide support for those 
initiatives, which corresponded to the Director General's idea of regional co-operative 
arrangements. 

56. In the Philippines, a radiological emergency plan had been approved, preparations were 
under way for hosting a demonstration course on predisposal waste management methods and 
procedures in November 1998, and a nuclear safety profile was being prepared for inclusion in 
a compendium of regional safety profiles. In addition, in March 1998, the Philippines had 
signed the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management, the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for 
Nuclear Damage. 
57. The Philippines deeply appreciated the technical assistance provided by the Agency and 
its contribution to enhancing the quality of life of its population. In the agricultural sector, 
mango producers were benefiting from the use of nuclear techniques to eradicate fruit flies, 
while the use of radiation to develop banana varieties resistant to a particular virus or to 
induce mutations in coconut palms for resistance to disease had increased the incomes of 
millions of farmers and helped alleviate rural poverty. 
58. In the fisheries sector, nuclear techniques were being used to evaluate "red tide" 
contamination, a seasonal phenomenon of great concern to fishermen and the public at large. 
In the health sector, nuclear medicine techniques were helping to improve the diagnosis and 
treatment of urinary tract problems in thousands of school children, thus mitigating the risk of 
permanent kidney damage. 
59. At the regional level, the Philippines was extremely pleased with the progress of 
activities under the RCA and was honoured to be the lead country in a subproject on water 
resources and to serve as regional resource unit for a subproject on marine coastal 
environment. The Philippines was a strong supporter of the Agency's technical co-operation 
programme - as manifested by its financial and in-kind contributions - and trusted that it 
would be increasingly responsive to development needs. 
60. With regard to safeguards, the Philippines welcomed the measures taken in respect of 
the handling and confidentiality of information, inspector training, access arrangements, the 
use of new technologies, and particularly the speedy conclusion of over 30 additional 
protocols. Having itself signed an additional protocol, the Philippines invited other countries 
to do likewise, so as to advance universal acceptance of the Model Additional Protocol and 
non-proliferation. 
61. Turning to the transport of radioactive materials, he welcomed the report on legally 
binding and non-binding international instruments and regulations (GOV/1998/17 and Add.1), 
which could serve as a useful reference document for future work in that area, such as, the 
harmonization of the Agency's Regulations for the Safe Transport of Radioactive Material 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 16 


with other international norms such as the IMO Code for the Safe Carriage of Irradiated 
Nuclear Fuel, Plutonium, and High-Level Radioactive Wastes in Flasks on board Ships. 

62. The Secretariat's continuing efforts, described in document GC(42)/INF/4, to strengthen 
its activities in the area of technical co-operation were much appreciated. The Philippines 
fully endorsed the technical co-operation strategy and the Partners in Development concept 
described therein. It also welcomed the increase in the indicative planning figure for 
1999-2000 from US $71 million to $73.5 million. Given the importance that the Philippines 
and the developing countries attached to technical co-operation, it was to be hoped that 
improvements in the quality and management of the technical co-operation programmes 
would be matched by a proportionate increase in funding for technical co-operation in 
2001-2002. 
63. He acknowledged the outstanding efforts of Mr. Benmoussa of Morocco, Chairman of 
the working group to develop criteria or guidelines for consideration of requests for the 
restoration of voting rights, and the procedural rules and practice related to notification to 
Member States in arrears contained in document GC(42)/10. To address the basic problem of 
non-payment, measures to facilitate the payment of contributions should be adopted at an 
early date. 
64. With regard to the pending issue of the revision of Article VI, he expressed appreciation 
for the efforts of everyone, and in particular Mr. Ikeda, Ambassador of Japan, who strived to 
reach a just and realistic solution. Like many other delegations, he believed that the 
expansion of the Board of Governors should rectify the under-representation of the developing 
countries and hoped that an expansion by seven seats would be possible. 
65. Lastly, he noted that the Philippines, like other States, was gravely concerned at the 
recent nuclear tests and called for their total cessation. It urged all parties to refrain from 
developing arms programmes or deploying missiles to deliver nuclear weapons, to prevent the 
transfer of nuclear-weapon-related materials, technology and equipment to third countries, and 
to sign the NPT and the CTBT. It likewise called on the nuclear-weapon States and all other 
States to accept the invitation put forward by the majority of the international community to 
negotiate a nuclear-weapons convention for the elimination of nuclear weapons within a 
certain time-frame. Those initiatives had been endorsed by the fifty-second session of the 
United Nations General Assembly. The Agency's statutory objective to promote the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy could only be achieved by eliminating the harmful uses of nuclear 
energy. 
66. Mr. NIEWODNICZANSKI (Poland), having welcomed Benin as a new member 
of the Agency, said that Poland, as a State associated with the European Union, fully endorsed 
the statement made on behalf of the European Union by the representative of Austria. 
67. He recalled that, at the previous session of the General Conference, Poland had signed 
the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management, the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil 
Liability for Nuclear Damage and an additional protocol to its safeguards agreement, and that 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 17 


two years previously the President of Poland had signed the CTBT in New York. His country 
intended to ratify all those legal instruments in the near future. By signing them, Poland had 
demonstrated not only its support for worldwide nuclear safety, but also its determination to 


co-operate with other countries in creating a solid legal framework for the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 

68. The Agency had always played an important role in establishing a legal framework for 
the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, and one of its greatest achievements in that area was 
without doubt the development, adoption and entry into force two years previously of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety. Poland, which was proud to be among the original parties to 
that Convention, welcomed the progress made at the first preparatory meeting in April 1997. 
An organizational meeting of the parties to the Convention was due to be held in Vienna the 
following week to prepare for the first review meeting which was to take place in spring 1999. 
69. Poland congratulated the Agency on its active role in drawing up those important 
international instruments. In order to gain public acceptance of the development of nuclear 
energy in countries where economic and environmental considerations justified such 
development, it was vital to ensure the operational safety of nuclear power plants and the 
safety of radioactive waste management. The new instruments, which formed part of the 
international nuclear safety culture, were of considerable assistance to national institutions 
responsible for nuclear safety. 
70. Poland, which strongly supported the action taken by the Agency in the field of 
safeguards, expressed its profound regret at the nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan. 
Such tests could lead again to a dangerous nuclear arms race and damage the integrity of the 
global non-proliferation regime of the NPT, to which nearly 200 States were party. The tests 
also jeopardized the CTBT and the achievement of one of the international community's basic 
objectives, which was to reduce the number of nuclear weapons and eventually eliminate them 
completely. The first essential step was therefore to persuade all countries capable of 
conducting tests not to do so, whether or not they were parties to the above-mentioned 
international instruments. 
71. The issue of illicit trafficking in nuclear material and radiation sources was also closely 
linked to the international community's efforts to ensure that nuclear energy was used for 
peaceful purposes. It was extremely important to control movements of nuclear material and 
other radiation sources and to detect illicit trafficking. Poland accorded the highest priority to 
that problem and very much appreciated the Agency's co-ordinative and advisory role in the 
field of the physical protection of nuclear material and combating illicit trafficking and, more 
generally, in combating the possibility of nuclear terrorism. 
72. Poland welcomed the action taken by the Secretariat to strengthen technical 
co-operation between the Agency and its Member States as well as among Member States 
themselves. It supported the new initiatives proposed by the Secretariat to make technical 
co-operation more efficient and profitable for both recipients and donors. Since the resources 
available for technical co-operation were not increasing, effectiveness in that area could only 
be improved by careful management throughout the project cycle, from identification to 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 18 


evaluation, and by better follow-up of all the activities related to technical co-operation, 
whether they were funded by the TCF, the Regular Budget or extrabudgetary resources. 

73. Poland, which had participated successfully for many years in various technical 
co-operation activities under the auspices of the Agency, as both donor and recipient, 
appreciated the assistance provided by or through the Agency. It continued to consider that 
the periodic meetings on technical co-operation organized by the Agency for the developing 
Member States in Europe were very useful and productive. Those meetings contributed also 
to better distribution of the resources allocated to the regional programme for Europe. Poland 
realized that it was important for the Agency to have the necessary resources available to 
implement the technical co-operation programme properly and therefore had decided to 
pledge, as it did every year, its full share of the target for the TCF. 
74. The fact that the nuclear option had not been mentioned in various international 
declarations issued after the Kyoto Conference demonstrated the high level of public concern 
about the risks associated with nuclear energy. In that regard, Poland welcomed the Agency's 
initiative to establish co-operation with relevant international organizations such as WHO, 
UNEP, the IEA and the NEA for the purpose of comparative assessment of different energy 
sources. 
75. The excellent results achieved by the Agency in various areas could be attributed to the 
Secretariat's continuing efforts to make the best possible use of the resources at its disposal. 
It should be congratulated particularly for the care it took to maintain efficiency in the process 
of preparing the programme and budget for the next biennium and particularly for its 
adherence to the principle of zero real growth in the budget for 1999. 
76. He was well aware, from personal experience, of the problems which could hamper the 
work of the General Conference and therefore strongly supported the conclusions and 
recommendations of the inter-sessional working group on streamlining the work of the 
General Conference. Member States' acceptance of those proposals and active co-operation 
to implement them would make the working practices of the General Conference more 
efficient and facilitate the achievement of the necessary agreements. 
77. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait), having welcomed the admission of Benin, said that the 
countries of the Middle East aspired to create a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the region, which 
would require Israel to accede to the NPT and place its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards. He hoped that the Middle East would be rid of all types of weapons of mass 
destruction. That issue was, however, closely linked to the application of safeguards in the 
Middle East, and the Agency was requested to continue its work in that field. 
78. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Kuwait was in favour of 
expanding the Board of Governors in such a way as to increase the number of seats reserved 
for the under-represented geographical regions, namely the Middle East and South Asia and 
Africa, without establishing any link between the three aspects of the issue. He wished to note 
that resolution GC(39)/RES/22 emphasized that "the primary responsibility for deciding upon 
the composition of regional groups lies with the respective groups themselves". He 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 19 


considered also that it would be more logical to leave unchanged the provision of Article VI 
which banned the immediate re-election of members whose mandate was about to expire. 

79. Kuwait which, like many other countries, suffered an acute shortage of potable water 
resources, had become for that reason a pioneer in the field of desalination and therefore 
supported all the studies carried out by the Agency on that issue. Any progress which could 
relieve the severe shortage of water would be welcome, all the more so because it was a 
problem which had the potential to become a source of conflict in several regions of the 
world. 
80. Referring indirectly to documents GOV/INF/1998/16 and GC(42)/14, he noted that, on 
5 August 1998, Iraq had announced that it was suspending co-operation with the Agency; that 
it would not permit access to "capable" sites or to sites other than those on which it provided 
regular declarations in accordance with the monitoring and verification plan; and that it would 
not co-operate with any activity involving investigations into its clandestine nuclear 
programme. 
81. On 11 August 1998, the Director General had addressed a letter to the President of the 
Security Council, stating that the limited activities undertaken by the Agency in Iraq, as a 
result of the restrictions imposed by Iraq, had fallen far short of full implementation of the 
ongoing monitoring and verification plan and had been resulting in a significantly lower level 
of assurance than would be provided through the full implementation of the plan. In his reply 
dated 18 August, the President had considered the announcement made by Iraq to be totally 
unacceptable and in violation of the relevant Security Council resolutions and the 
memorandum of understanding signed by the Secretary-General and the Deputy Prime 
Minister of Iraq on 23 February. 
82. The new escalation of tension with respect to Iraq had led to the unanimous adoption by 
the Security Council of resolution 1194 (1998) dated 9 September 1998, in which it 
condemned Iraq's decision and demanded that Iraq rescind it. For its part, the Ministerial 
Council of the Gulf Co-operation Council had, in the final communique issued at the end of 
its sixty-eighth session, which had taken place on 27 and 28 August 1998, expressed its grave 
concern at Iraq's decision and had demanded that Iraq rescind it. In that regard, Kuwait 
considered that the activities carried out by the Agency in Iraq made a substantial contribution 
to ensuring peace and stability in the region. 
83. Kuwait, which fully appreciated the Agency's work, especially in the fields of medicine, 
agriculture, industry and the environment, would continue to assist the Agency in carrying out 
its noble task, which was to safeguard the peaceful uses of nuclear energy and to develop the 
scientific and technical capabilities of developing countries in the field of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. 
84. Ms. AGGREY-ORLEANS (Ghana), welcoming Benin, said that the Agency's 
expanding membership was testimony not only to the increasingly important role played by 
the organization since the end of the Cold War, but also to the untiring efforts it was making 
to direct the use of atomic energy towards the promotion of prosperity, peace and security. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 20 


85. The numerous conflicts worldwide and the depletion of resources in the face of 
population growth made it imperative that nuclear energy and the other instruments of 
technological advancement should be utilized to improve the human condition and to promote 
harmony and understanding among nations. Any other use of atomic energy, even as a means 
of deterrent, was ultimately detrimental to the well-being of humanity. Member States should 
therefore provide their unqualified support to the Agency in the pursuit of its objectives. 
86. Ghana believed that peace was a prerequisite for economic development and human 
progress. It therefore invited all States to sign and ratify the NPT and the CTBT together with 
the other treaties and conventions concluded under the Agency's auspices in order to eliminate 
weapons of mass destruction and make the world a more peaceful and safer place. 
87. The common destiny of mankind placed on both nuclear-weapon States and 
non-nuclear-weapon States the inescapable obligation to be genuinely supportive of efforts 
towards complete nuclear disarmament. Any act which was inconsistent with that objective or 
any selective approach to the issue of a ban on nuclear weapons constituted a threat to world 
peace. Special assistance should be granted to States in nuclear-weapon-free zones in 
recognition of their decision to forego such weapons and to encourage them to explore the 
peaceful uses of nuclear energy. The implementation of major development projects in those 
zones would, in addition, motivate other regions to follow their example. Ghana therefore 
supported the efforts to establish nuclear-weapon-free zones in the Middle East and in all 
other regions of the world. 
88. Having noted Ghana's signature of an additional protocol in June 1998, which affirmed 
the significance it attached to Agency safeguards, she commended the Agency's efforts to 
assist Member States in the development of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. At a time 
when drought and famine affected a large portion of the world's population, including Africa, 
the transfer of nuclear technology could be of enormous benefit. In that regard, she drew 
attention to the resolutions adopted by the fortieth and forty-first regular sessions of the 
General Conference on the evaluation of the technical and economic feasibility of the 
production of potable water from the desalination of sea water by means of nuclear energy. 
She called for urgent action to implement those resolutions in order to guarantee a lasting 
solution to the problem of water shortages, whether for human consumption or agricultural 
production. 
89. Ghana expressed satisfaction at the fruitful relations which existed between the Ghana 
Atomic Energy Commission and the Agency, hi May 1998, the President of Ghana had 
commissioned a radiotherapy centre established as part of the first Agency Model Project in 
West Africa. She also thanked the Governments of China and the United States of America 
for the valuable support they had provided for that project. 
90. Research in Ghana was being vigorously pursued with a view to the genetic 
improvement of important staple crops such as cassava. Such studies, if given the appropriate 
level of support, could lead to an improvement in the nutrition not only of the people of 
Ghana, but also of the entire region. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 21 


91. Furthermore, the Ghana Atomic Energy Commission was using neutron activation 
analysis in studies on the nutrition of ruminants. Another important study undertaken by the 
Commission, with the Agency's co-operation, related to the extraction of precious metals by 
means of biological agents so as to reduce the use of environmentally unfriendly techniques. 
92. Thanking the Agency for its work, she assured it of her country's steadfast support 
rooted in the belief that nuclear energy could greatly contribute to economic development and 
to the progress of humanity in a climate of peace and security. She was also convinced that 
the Agency could only carry out its work with the unreserved support of the international 
community. 
93. Mr. TOSHEVSKI (The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia) welcomed the 
constant increase in the Agency's membership, the latest addition to which was Benin. It was 
satisfying to note the Agency's continuing efforts to encourage the safe use of nuclear energy 
to foster the sustainable economic and social development of its Member States, including the 
preparation of legal instruments. In that connection, it was important to recall once again that 
countries with nuclear power plants operating at a critically low level of safety should cooperate 
closely with the Agency in the application of nuclear safety standards. He emphasized 
the particular importance of the measures for strengthening and improving regional cooperation 
for the purposes of adopting a more integrated approach to safety and environmental 
problems; in that regard, the attention being paid by the Agency, despite its limited resources, 
to the regional projects within the proposed technical co-operation programme for 1999-2000 
was extremely valuable. 
94. The Agency should be congratulated on the way in which it responded to the needs of its 
Member States. Through its assistance, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia was 
participating with other countries in the region in the Model Project entitled "Upgrading 
Radiation Protection Infrastructure". As a result, a new law on radiation protection had been 
drafted and there were plans to hold a training course on the problems of radioprotection in 
the area of industrial radiography designed and funded by the Agency. 
95. Furthermore, as a country in transition, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 
needed to adopt a new approach to energy planning and it hoped that the Agency would assist 
it in that area. It also wished to thank the Agency for the valuable technical assistance which 
it provided in the application of nuclear techniques, which had become an integral part of the 
country's technical and economic development. Despite the budgetary constraints which it 
was experiencing, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia had made a contribution to 
the TCF in order to facilitate the implementation of the national projects supported by the 
Agency. Those projects related to nuclear medicine, animal production, irrigation and 
non-destructive testing techniques in industry. The projects for the following cycle had been 
defined with the assistance of an Agency mission. Finally, The Former Yugoslav Republic of 
Macedonia would be happy to host any training activities organized by the Agency in the 
areas in which it possessed a high level of technical expertise. 
96. Ms. MOSLEY (New Zealand) said that the people of her country were deeply 
shocked by the nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan, and that her Government had 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 22 


condemned those tests. Consistent with its position on the matter, New Zealand had 


co-sponsored a draft resolution on nuclear testing, the main aim of which was to urge India 
and Pakistan, together with all other countries, in particular those with nuclear capabilities, to 
sign without conditions and without delay the NPT and the CTBT. 

97. The growing number of countries which had signed the CTBT was a source of great 
satisfaction and it was particularly gratifying that two nuclear-weapon States were among 
the 21 countries that had ratified the Treaty. She expressed the hope that other key countries 
would shortly follow suit. New Zealand itself would be in a position to ratify the CTBT 
before the end of the year. A top priority for New Zealand was to work towards a steady and 
credible build-up of the CTBT's verification systems so that the Treaty would be operational 
as soon as it entered into force. 
98. Emphasizing the importance of the contribution made by the Agency in the field of 
non-proliferation and disarmament through the safeguards system, she expressed concern at 
the fact that more than 50 countries had not yet concluded NPT safeguards agreements. 
However, she was pleased to note that an ever increasing number of States were concluding 
additional protocols to their safeguards agreements, and New Zealand would itself be signing 
its additional protocol the following day which would enter into force immediately. New 
Zealand would thereby demonstrate its commitment to nuclear non-proliferation, nuclear 
disarmament and the total elimination of nuclear weapons. In that regard, she welcomed the 
significant efforts made during the Conference on Disarmament in Geneva, including the 
decision to set up an ad hoc committee responsible for negotiating a treaty banning the 
production of fissile material for military purposes. Nevertheless, the outcome of the second 
meeting of the Preparatory Committee for the 2000 NPT Review Conference had been 
disappointing, and the international community should be prepared to face formidable 
challenges at the third meeting to be held in New York in April 1999. 
99. Noting the negative report presented by the Director General on the DPRK, she 
endorsed the Agency's view that the safeguards agreement between the Agency and the 
DPRK remained in force and was binding, and that the DPRK was in breach of that 
agreement. New Zealand supported the Agreed Framework and was a participant in KEDO, 
an ambitious project whose implementation depended on compliance with commitments made 
with respect to the Agency. The recent provocative acts by the DPRK could diminish support 
for the project. The DPRK was therefore urged to adopt a more responsible approach to 
regional security issues. 
100. New Zealand was concerned to note that once again Iraq had failed to co-operate fully 
with the Agency. It had always advocated that Iraq should demonstrate full and complete 
co-operation with the Agency and comply strictly with the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. It remained fully committed to supporting the United Nations position on Iraq. 
101. New Zealand was concerned at the risks to its population, environment and economy 
represented by the transport of radioactive materials by other countries. It therefore fully 
supported the initiative of the current session of the General Conference which would provide 
greater transparency with regard to the status and implementation of the relevant national laws 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 23 


and regulations; it considered, however, that the initiative fell far short of assuaging its 
concerns. There should at least be prior notification and, ideally, prior informed consent 
procedures. Furthermore, she welcomed the study on the radiological situation on the atolls of 
Mururoa and Fangataufa, and the conference devoted to that study held in Vienna. 


102. Looking back over the period during which her country had been a member of the Board 
of Governors, she noted that it had been marked by the adoption of the Model Additional 
Protocol, and by the departure of Mr. Blix and his replacement by Mr. ElBaradei. 
103. Mr. FRSTER (Netherlands) said that his delegation was impressed by the 
various steps taken by Mr. ElBaradei to improve the Agency's functioning, particularly the 
studies he had initiated and the changes in the management structure he had made to improve 
effectiveness and efficiency. The Netherlands delegation also welcomed Benin as a new 
member of the Agency. In addition, it endorsed the comments made by the representative of 
Austria on behalf of the European Union. 
104. The key words in the Netherlands energy policy were: reliability, affordability and 
cleanliness. The current main focus of attention was energy conservation, renewable energies 
and liberalization of the electricity and natural gas markets. In June 1998, new legislation 
opening up the electricity market had been passed by Parliament. As a result, the State's role 
would change considerably; its role in planning would decline and its task of regulating prices 
would largely disappear. On the other hand, it would have to create conditions allowing the 
market to function properly and monitor compliance with the rules. 
105. Nuclear energy played a relatively modest role in the Netherlands. At present, there was 
only one nuclear power plant, the Borssele plant, which would stay in operation until the end 
of 2003. However, the Netherlands continued to play a substantial role in the front end (gas 
centrifuge enrichment) and the back end (waste processing and storage) of the nuclear fuel 
cycle. The nuclear picture in the Netherlands would not be complete without mentioning the 
Petten high-flux reactor. That research reactor was owned by the European Commission, but 
operated by the Netherlands Energy Research Foundation. It remained a major tool for 
Netherlands and European nuclear research and had become the main European supplier of 
radiopharmaceuticals. hi addition, it played a leading role in boron neutron capture therapy. 
106. No increase in nuclear capacity was anticipated in the Netherlands in the foreseeable 
future. The Government's policy was to keep the nuclear option open in order to be able "to 
board the train" in the twenty-first century, if that proved desirable, hi that context, the 
Netherlands was participating in international research projects in the fields of nuclear safety, 
decommissioning and nuclear waste. It remained interested in the development of new reactor 
concepts, such as advanced light-water reactors and high-temperature gas-cooled reactors, in 
order to contribute to a sustainable energy supply in the long term. 
107. With regard to Agency activities, three issues were particularly important for the 
Netherlands, namely nuclear safety, technical assistance and the strengthening of safeguards, 
hi the area of nuclear safety, the Netherlands was actively involved in various international 
efforts aimed at improving the safety of the nuclear power plants in Eastern Europe and the 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 24 


Commonwealth of Independent States, an involvement that included contributions to the 
Nuclear Safety Account and to the Chernobyl Shelter Fund, to which Fund the Netherlands 
had been one of the first countries to contribute, with an amount of $3 million. It was also 
collaborating with Norway and other countries to help the Government of the Russian 
Federation improve the management of nuclear waste of both civilian and military origin. In 
that connection, the Netherlands was concerned that the Nuclear Safety Account and the 
recipient countries had not reached a consensus on the early closure of unsafe reactors, and 
called on the countries concerned to honour their commitments. 


108. With regard to technical assistance, the Netherlands had had the privilege of chairing the 
Informal Working Group on the Financing of Technical Assistance during the past year. The 
report of that Working Group (GOV/1998/36), whose recommendations had been approved 
by the Board of Governors in June, stated that technical assistance to the developing Member 
States remained one of the Agency's main activities. It urged Member States to regard their 
contributions to the Agency's technical co-operation programme as a firm political 
commitment. Consensus had later been reached on increasing the target for voluntary 
contributions to the TCF for 1999 to $73 million. The large number of countries which had 
responded to the call to continue, or resume, contributing to the Fund was encouraging, and 
the level of contributions was much higher than the previous year. The Netherlands, as 
always, would pay its share of the target for voluntary contributions to the Fund in full and on 
time. 
109. The signing ceremony for the additional protocols concluded between the 15 countries 
of the European Union, the European Commission and the Agency had taken place the day 
before. Like other members of the European Union, the Netherlands would take the necessary 
steps to implement its protocol as soon as possible, and urged all countries which had not yet 
done so to conclude such agreements with the Agency and implement them so that the nonproliferation 
system would be truly strengthened making the world a safer place for all. 
110. Finally, the Netherlands shared the concerns expressed by the United States of America, 
and others, about the serious consequences that the malfunctioning caused by the millennium 
change could have on nuclear reactors and other critical systems. The Netherlands called on 
the Agency to investigate the matter thoroughly and to use its expertise to advise Member 
States. It also called on Member States not to underestimate the problem and to make sure 
that their critical systems were not vulnerable. 
111. Mr. NGUNI (Zambia), having welcomed Benin, stressed that the Agency should 
continue to strengthen its technical co-operation activities that benefited the largest number of 
Member States. The Model Project concept was commendable, as it enabled the developing 
countries to take advantage of a technology which had initially been perceived as applicable 
only to the developed countries. 
112. The nuclear medicine facility set up in Lusaka under the technical co-operation 
programme had had a significant impact on the country's health system. Efforts were being 
made to link that facility to its South African counterpart with a view to practising 
telemedicine, thereby improving diagnosis and treatment. That was a good example of 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 25 


mutually advantageous South-South co-operation. There were also plans to establish a similar 
link with a hospital in Ndola, in the North-East of the country. 

113. The plant tissue culture facility was contributing to the expansion of the agriculture 
sector by providing growers with virus-resistant potato seed. In addition, it was now 
providing farmers in drought-prone areas with disease-free cassava plant material. Research 
on improving various crops through induced mutation had produced promising results. The 
country also had the physical and technical capacity for producing tissue grafts from pigskin. 
114. Over the past year, the Radiation Protection Board had provided technical assistance to 
the Zambia Consolidated Copper Mines (ZCCM) company with a view to the immobilization 
of radioactive sources. It had already been possible to condition and store 178 sources. Work 
was continuing with a view to conditioning the remaining spent radioactive sources in the 
ZCCM mines, as well as those belonging to other users. The challenge now facing the 
Radiation Protection Board was to acquire the capacity to trace abandoned sources and to 
detect illicit activities. 
115. In an effort to increase public awareness, the Radiation Protection Board had organized 
joint workshops with environmental protection associations. A national conference on 
radioactive waste had also been held, as well as an awareness workshop on radiation 
protection for customs officials. 
116. Zambia, which continued to value technical co-operation within the framework of 
AFRA, had hosted three regional conferences aimed at initiating and implementing AFRA 
projects, hi view of the importance of the AFRA programme for the development of nuclear 
science and technology, Zambia urged the Agency and other partners to provide the necessary 
support. 
117. Zambia appreciated the assistance provided by the Agency over the past year for the 
development of human resources. Several Zambian technicians and scientists had acquired 
new technical skills as a result of training fellowships, scientific visits and training courses. 
118. He welcomed the measures being taken to strengthen nuclear safety and waste safety. 
He also commended the efforts to strengthen the safeguards system, to apply the Model 
Additional Protocol and to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive 
sources. 
119. In connection with the expansion of the Board of Governors, Zambia reaffirmed that 
amendment of Article VI of the Statute should take into account the geographical 
representation of the Agency's members. Finally, he announced that his country pledged its 
full share of the target for voluntary contributions to the TCF for 1998 and had taken steps, 
effective from the following day, to settle all its outstanding arrears. 
120. Mr. ALFONSO DE ALBA (Mexico), having congratulated Mr. ElBaradei on the 
work he had done since assuming the post of Director General, welcomed Benin, whose 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 26 


membership of the Agency reaffirmed the principle of the universality of the United Nations 
and its specialized agencies. 


121. In Mexico's view, the nuclear tests which had been carried out ran counter to universal 
strengthening of the nuclear non-proliferation regime, undermined the principles laid down in 
the CTBT and, above all, endangered international peace and security, not to mention the 
effects they had on the environment and human health. As a consequence, the Mexican 
Government had, on numerous occasions, spoken out in favour of a total ban on such tests and 
had made firm commitments to help preserve and strengthen the nuclear weapons 
non-proliferation regime and to bring about an early start to negotiations on the total 
elimination of nuclear weapons and their delivery systems within a specific time-frame. It had 
condemned the nuclear tests conducted by India and Pakistan on the day it had been informed 
about them and had reiterated its condemnation in all the competent forums. 
122. Mexico was convinced that vertical and horizontal non-proliferation of nuclear 
weapons, as well as a clear commitment by the nuclear-weapon States to a wide-ranging 
process of general and complete disarmament under effective international control, were two 
indissociable elements crucial to the establishment of world peace. Thus, Mexico and seven 
other countries were making efforts to start a new series of negotiations aimed at nuclear 
disarmament, as set down in the declaration of 9 June 1998 entitled "Towards a 
nuclear-weapon-free world: the need for a new agenda"*. 
123. Recalling that in recent years there had been a strengthening of the international nuclear 
safety regime, which was now based on the Convention on Nuclear Safety and the Joint 
Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste 
Management, he was pleased to inform the General Conference that the Mexican Government 
would sign the latter Convention in the near future. 
124. The Agency should develop and strengthen its role so as to be able to face future 
problems in the application of safeguards, technical co-operation and nuclear safety. 
Regarding the application of safeguards, Mexico expected the Agency to play a key role, not 
only to ensure compliance with the requirements of a future treaty prohibiting the production 
of fissile material for nuclear weapons or other nuclear explosive devices, but also to verify 
that the material removed from nuclear warheads would not be reused to develop new 
weapons. In that regard, it was to be hoped that, appropriate mechanisms would be put into 
place, within the framework of the Trilateral Initiative, in which the Agency was taking part, 
to verify that the fissile material derived from the arms programmes of the Russian Federation 
and the United States of America would not be reused for military purposes. 
125. It was clear that the policy of zero real growth in the budget would have to be 
re-examined if the Member States wanted the Agency to perform the new tasks before it and, 
especially, if they did not want to exacerbate the imbalance between the verification system 
and the technical co-operation and nuclear safety programmes. 
Reproduced in document INFCIRC/565. 


GC(42)/OR.6 
page 27 


126. Mexico was convinced that the Agency's safeguards policies were well-founded and 
contributed to promoting international peace and security, and, in particular, that the protocols 
additional to safeguards agreements could only strengthen the non-proliferation regime and 
promote a climate of confidence favouring comprehensive nuclear disarmament. It was 
equally important that technical co-operation activities should develop in proportion to the 
verification activities if the foundations and principles underlying the Agency's Statute were 
not to be emasculated. 
127. Mexico had always supported the Agency's technical co-operation activities and the 
Partners in Development arrangements between the Agency and its Member States. He 
appealed once again to the Agency and its Member States to take measures to strengthen those 
activities. In that regard, the Mexican Government welcomed the conclusion of an 
intergovernmental agreement for ARCAL. That agreement, following the regional cooperation 
agreements for Africa and Asia, would help further strengthen co-operation between 
the States of the region. 
128. Since its commencement 14 years previously, the ARCAL programme had been an 
important mechanism for the exchange of experience and knowledge at the regional level. It 
had enabled vertical and horizontal co-operation and had benefited the development of human 
resources in such key areas as agriculture, human health and the environment. Technicians 
and experts in the region were travelling more and more frequently to other countries at the 
request of their governments and institutions to provide consultant services. In addition, the 
number of training courses was increasing from year to year, both under the ARCAL 
programme and the regular technical co-operation programme. 
129. A high priority for the Mexican Government was collaboration with Central America 
and the Caribbean. Thus, in 1998, as part of a joint effort by the Agency, the United States of 
America and Mexico, a project had been set up to control the screwworm in Jamaica. 
Mexico, which had the largest sterile insect production centre in the world, had in the past 
provided its services to control the screwworm in other Central American and Caribbean 
countries. 
130. With regard to the national nuclear programme, he said that the OSART missions to 
Mexico in February 1997 and August 1998 had given a favourable assessment of the 
operational quality assurance programme. The National Commission for Nuclear Safety and 
Safeguards had been continuing its work and had not recorded any major incident concerning 
nuclear safety or security. 
131. Various technical co-operation projects between the Agency and the National Institute 
for Nuclear Research had been successfully completed and the Institute was continuing the 
activities started with Agency assistance using its own resources. Given the importance of 
technical co-operation for strengthening international ties, for the developing countries and for 
training in the peaceful uses of nuclear energy, he urged all Member States to pay their 
contributions to the TCF in foil and on time. 

GC(42)/ 
OR.6 
page 
28 


132. 
The 
hopes 
of 
the 
international 
community 
of 
living 
in 
a 
safe 
world 
could 
not 
be 
realized 
by 
rhetoric 
alone 
or 
by 
promises 
which 
invariably 
ended 
in 
prevarication. 
Thus, 
Mexico 
urged 
delegations 
to 
make 
even 
greater 
efforts 
so 
that 
the 
General 
Conference 
could 
achieve 
tangible 
results 
and 
thereby 
respond 
to 
the 
wishes 
of 
the 
overwhelming 
majority 
of 
the 
peoples 
of 
the 
world. 
Mr. 
Meer 
(United 
States 
of 
America) 
took 
the 
Chair. 


133. 
Mr. 
VALENTUKEVICIU 
S 
(Lithuania), 
having 
welcomed 
Benin 
to 
membership 
of 
the 
Agency 
and 
commended 
the 
Director 
General, 
said 
that 
Lithuania 
was 
seriously 
concerned 
by 
world 
developments, 
particularly 
the 
nuclear 
tests 
conducted 
by 
India 
and 
Pakistan. 
134. 
For 
the 
past 
six 
years 
Lithuania 
had 
been 
a 
leading 
world 
producer 
of 
nuclear-generated 
electricity. 
In 
the 
previous 
year, 
the 
Ignalina 
nuclear 
power 
plant 
had 
produced 
more 
than 
81% 
of 
the 
country's 
electricity. 
Improvement 
in 
safety 
at 
that 
plant 
was 
one 
of 
the 
Government's 
main 
goals 
and 
considerable 
resources 
were 
being 
used 
to 
that 
end. 
A 
detailed 
assessment 
had 
shown 
that 
the 
plant's 
safety 
level 
was 
satisfactory 
and 
there 
was 
no 
need 
for 
an 
immediate 
permanent 
shutdown 
and 
decommissioning. 
For 
the 
first 
time, 
Lithuania 
had 
started 
the 
licensing 
process 
for 
one 
of 
the 
Ignalina 
units, 
with 
the 
invaluable 
assistance 
of 
the 
world 
nuclear 
community. 
135. 
Lithuania 
had 
started 
to 
update 
its 
energy 
strategy. 
A 
recent 
study 
had 
confirmed 
that 
nuclear 
energy 
remained 
the 
cheapest 
solution 
for 
the 
short 
term 
and 
it 
was 
expected 
to 
continue 
playing 
an 
important 
role 
in 
electricity 
generation 
at 
least 
until 
the 
year 
2010. 
136. 
Lithuania 
had 
acceded 
to 
the 
NPT 
in 
1991. 
It 
had 
concluded 
a 
safeguards 
agreement 
with 
the 
Agency 
in 
1992, 
and 
signed 
an 
additional 
protocol 
in 
March 
1998. 
To 
enforce 
the 
Treaty 
and 
to 
be 
able 
to 
control 
the 
nuclear 
material 
on 
its 
territory, 
Lithuania 
had 
established 
a 
State 
system 
of 
accounting 
for 
and 
control 
of 
nuclear 
material, 
together 
with 
the 
associated 
regulations. 
Most 
of 
that 
material 
was 
spent 
fuel 
from 
Ignalina. 
137. 
In 
accordance 
with 
the 
requirements 
of 
the 
Convention 
on 
the 
Physical 
Protection 
of 
Nuclear 
Material, 
to 
which 
Lithuania 
had 
acceded 
in 
1994, 
the 
competent 
authorities 
had 
elaborated 
procedures 
which 
took 
into 
account 
local 
criteria 
while 
meeting 
international 
standards. 
Also, 
Lithuania 
was 
exercising 
strict 
control 
over 
the 
export 
of 
nuclear-related 
items. 
138. 
Good 
radioactive 
waste 
management 
was 
essential 
for 
the 
operation 
of 
nuclear 
power 
plants 
and 
the 
development 
of 
nuclear 
energy. 
Lithuania 
had 
signed 
the 
Joint 
Convention 
on 
the 
Safety 
of 
Spent 
Fuel 
Management 
and 
on 
the 
Safety 
of 
Radioactive 
Waste 
Management 
at 
the 
forty-first 
session 
of 
the 
General 
Conference. 
In 
1998, 
a 
draft 
law 
on 
radioactive 
waste 
management, 
drawn 
up 
with 
the 
help 
of 
Agency 
experts, 
had 
been 
submitted 
to 
the 
Lithuanian 
Government. 
The 
problems 
associated 
with 
the 
final 
disposal 
of 
spent 
nuclear 
fuel 
and 
lowand 
intermediate-level 
radioactive 
waste 
could 
only 
be 
solved 
through 
ajoint 
effort 
on 
the 
part 
of 
the 
world 
nuclear 
community, 
with 
the 
Agency 
playing 
an 
all-important 
co-ordinating 
role. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 29 


139. Lithuania had been one of the first countries to sign the Protocol to Amend the Vienna 
Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Convention on Supplementary 
Compensation for Nuclear Damage. The Ignalina nuclear power plant was not yet insured 
against nuclear accident, but the required conditions were gradually being achieved. 
140. Lithuania was especially grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had provided under 
regional technical co-operation projects to upgrade radiotherapy facilities and to develop a 
legal framework for nuclear activities and radioactive waste management. It intended to pay, 
subject to parliamentary approval, its full share of the target for voluntary contributions to the 
TCF in 1999. Furthermore, it was considering making special contributions to the TCF to 
finance specific tasks. 
141. Mr. CHAUNY de PORTURAS-HOYLE (Peru) made a special point of 
congratulating the Ambassador of Mexico on her election as President of the General 
Conference and welcomed Benin as a new member of the Agency. 
142. The Agency's technical co-operation was crucial to the development of the peaceful 
applications of nuclear energy, especially in the developing countries. In that regard, he 
highlighted the substantial aid that Peru had received under various projects, enabling it not 
only to profit from the experience of leading international experts, but also to receive valuable 
equipment. In addition, a large number of national specialists had participated in training 
programmes abroad. In particular, the Peruvian Government was grateful for the 
extrabudgetary contributions made by the Government of the United States of America to 
finance major projects in the fields of health and agriculture. 
143. During the past year, the Peruvian Institute of Nuclear Energy had continued, and 
improved, implementation of a series of measures to ensure adequate radiation protection for 
the population, considering that there were now more than 2600 ionizing radiation sources 
being used in such sectors as medicine, industry, teaching and research. 
144. Peru had increased its radioisotope production by almost 4.5% compared with 
the previous year. Particularly noteworthy was the development of two new 
radiopharmaceuticals, one for renal function studies and the other for cerebral perfusion 
studies. 
145. In the field of environmental radiological monitoring, Peru was working in accordance 
with its commitments under the Antarctic Treaty and the Permanent South Pacific 
Commission. Thus, experts from the Peruvian Institute of Nuclear energy were participating 
for the second year running in a scientific expedition to study radiation levels in the Antarctic. 
146. In the health sector, more than 12 000 Peruvian patients had continued to benefit from 
the diagnostic and therapeutic nuclear medicine services provided by a pilot centre for nuclear 
biology and medicine. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 30 


147. In the industrial sector, the multi-purpose irradiation facility, which had been in 
operation for three years, had been used for the conservation of more than 234 000 kilograms 
of food products for domestic consumption and export. 
148. Peru had signed the Convention on Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage 
and the Protocol to Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage as it 
was convinced that those two instruments laid the foundations of an international solidarity 
regime for the compensation of victims. Peru had also signed the Joint Convention on the 
Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management with a 
view to incorporating its requirements in national regulations so as to ensure adequate 
protection of the population and the environment against the harmful effects of ionizing 
radiation. Furthermore, it would take part in the organizational meeting of the Contracting 
Parties of the Convention on Nuclear Safety, to be held in Vienna from 29 September to 
2 October 1998. 
149. In the past year, Peru had hosted several technical meetings, one of which, held in 
October 1997, had been for users of gamma cameras and software. In addition, Peru had 
organized, with Agency support, a Latin American workshop to harmonize radiopharmacy 
training programmes as well as a seminar on nuclear techniques to mark the Agency's fortieth 
anniversary. 
150. He underlined the importance for Peru of the ARCAL programme which, following the 
wish of the countries of the region, was expected to acquire new scope as an 
intergovernmental agreement based on the Partners in Development concept. As a result of 
that new impetus, all the countries of the region would strengthen the co-operation links 
already uniting them and move towards sustainable development from which the Latin 
American population as a whole would profit directly. 
151. Peru, which had always been a supporter of worldwide disarmament under strict 
international control, attached particular importance to the non-proliferation of weapons of 
mass destruction or weapons with indiscriminate effect, which had motivated it to sign and 
implement the main relevant international instruments. For that reason, the Peruvian 
Government deeply deplored the nuclear tests conducted in May in South Asia and 
emphasized the need to restart multilateral negotiations on nuclear disarmament, particularly 
with a view to achieving universal accession to the NPT and the entry into force of the CTBT. 
152. Mr. NIITENBERG (Estonia), having congratulated Benin on becoming a member 
of the Agency, associated himself with the statement made by Austria on behalf of the 
European Union. 
153. He was deeply concerned about the nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan, 
which posed a serious threat to the non-proliferation regime and to world peace and security. 
He therefore called on all States which had not already done so to accede to the NPT, the 
cornerstone of the global nuclear non-proliferation regime. He also urged States with nuclear 
capabilities to sign and ratify the CTBT so as to enable its early entry into force. 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 31 


154. Welcoming the recent establishment of an ad hoc committee of the Conference on 
Disarmament to negotiate a treaty to prohibit the production of fissile material for nuclear 
weapons, he said that nuclear disarmament was a continuing process whose ultimate goal was 
the elimination of nuclear weapons. Care should be taken, however, not to hamper the 
process as a whole by setting unrealistic time-frames for attainment of the objectives and by 
excluding the possibility of intermediate measures. His Government hoped that the work of 
the ad hoc committee would be rapidly concluded. 
155. His delegation welcomed the strengthening of the safeguards system and the signature 
of additional protocols by a number of States, particularly all the States of the European 
Union. His Government had demonstrated its support for the non-proliferation regime by 
concluding a safeguards agreement with the Agency in November 1997, and it was currently 
investigating the possibility of concluding an additional protocol. 
156. His delegation noted with satisfaction that more and more States were acceding to the 
three legal instruments opened for signature in September 1997. Two of them, the Protocol to 
Amend the Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage and the Convention on 
Supplementary Compensation for Nuclear Damage, were creating a solid legal basis for 
extending the amount of compensation awarded to victims of nuclear accidents. 
157. With regard to the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the 
Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, he reiterated his Government's support for the 
Convention's principles and announced that the necessary preparations for accession to it had 
already begun. 
158. Estonian legislation in the field of radiation protection had also advanced in 1997 
and 1998. The law on radiation protection, which had come into force in May 1997, had 
designated the Estonian Radiation Protection Centre as the national authority responsible for 
implementing and improving the relevant legislation. That Centre, which had 25 employees, 
was functioning effectively under the auspices of the Ministry of the Environment. A series 
of draft regulations had been prepared, five of which - mainly concerning licensing procedures 
for activities involving radiation - had already entered into force. In addition, a decree on the 
registration of radiation sources had been promulgated. Eight further regulations were 
expected to be completed by the end of 1998, and the process would continue the following 
year. While putting that legislative framework in place, the Estonian authorities were taking 
due account of the internationally accepted safety standards, and he thanked the States and 
international organizations which had assisted Estonia in that process. 
159. Estonia was also grateful to the Agency for the assistance it had provided under 
technical co-operation projects and especially welcomed the inclusion in the 1999-2000 
programme of a feasibility study on a final repository for radioactive waste. The Estonian 
Government intended to play an active role in international co-operation projects. It was fully 
aware of its obligation to ensure the safety of its population and its territory. That principle 
also applied to the activities of Estonian authorities within the framework of the country's 
"historical legacy", namely the decommissioning of the former Soviet military base at Paldiski 
and the work which had just started on restoration of the uranium milling tailings dump in 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 32 


Sillamae in north-eastern Estonia. A group of international experts had been advising on the 
decommissioning of the Paldiski base since 1994 and a similar group responsible for Sillamae 
issues had been established in November 1997. His Government thanked all the States and 
international organizations which were participating in the activities of those groups. 

160. Ms. KAWONZA (Zimbabwe), having welcomed the fact that Benin had been 
approved for membership of the Agency, said that Zimbabwe was benefiting from Agency 
technical assistance in four sectors identified in the Country Programme Framework as being 
of high priority: food and agriculture, human health, hydrology and radiation safety. Three 
projects involving the peaceful applications of nuclear techniques were currently under way 
with Agency support. 
161. The purpose of the project on isotopes in water resources assessment and development 
was to establish a laboratory which would perform routine analyses for the carbon-14 dating 
of groundwater with a view to determining whether the aquifers in question had been charged 
recently, the rates of recharge and the vulnerability of the groundwater to pollution. The 
laboratory equipment had been installed, and groundwater from several aquifers in different 
parts of the country was being studied. Technicians had been sent to Australia and South 
Africa for training in the use of that modern nuclear equipment. 
162. Significant progress had been made in the project on biological nitrogen fixation for 
increased crop production for smallholders - a Model Project from which the African region 
as a whole should benefit. 
163. The sterile insect technique, which had been applied successfully on the island of 
Zanzibar, was now being applied in Zimbabwe to combat the tsetse fly. 
164. Zimbabwe was examining its national radiation protection regulations and discussing 
with the Agency ways of strengthening international co-operation in nuclear, radiation and 
waste safety. 
165. The aim of all those activities was to improve the quality of life of most of Zimbabwe's 
less privileged people, who lived in rural areas. Her delegation was therefore in favour of 
Agency technical co-operation being strengthened through generous contributions to the TCF. 
166. On 29 April 1998, Zimbabwe had joined AFRA, enabling it to co-operate with other 
African Member States in the development of nuclear science and technology. In July, 
Zimbabwe had - in collaboration with the Agency - hosted a regional training course on the 
production of basic reagents for radioimmunoassay of tumour markers. 
167. As to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Zimbabwe was in favour of an 
expansion of the Board by seven seats - one of them to be assigned to Africa. 
168. In conclusion, she said that Zimbabwe was aware of its obligations as a member of the 
Agency with regard to its contributions to the Regular Budget and payment of assessed 
programme costs. It had not been able to fulfil its obligations on time, however, owing to the 

GC(42)/OR.6 
page 33 


introduction of an 18-month budget cycle which would be ending in December. It would 
rectify the matter in the budgetary year that would start in January 1999. 

169. Mr. AMIN (Afghanistan) said that his country attached great importance to the 
various legal instruments relating to non-proliferation, a ban on nuclear testing and complete 
disarmament - including nuclear disarmament - and to the steps being taken by the 
international community to implement those instruments. That was why it had been alarmed 
at the nuclear tests carried out on 28 May 1998 just 20 km from its southern border. Those 
tests had increased the danger of nuclear confrontation in the region and had also exposed the 
Afghan population to nuclear radiation. Although Afghanistan had appealed officially to 
UNEP after Pakistan's May 1998 nuclear tests, no tangible measures had been taken to 
ascertain the effects of those tests on the Afghan population and environment. His country 
expected the Agency and WHO to determine whether the population of southern Afghanistan 
had been exposed to nuclear radiation as a result of the tests and to assess the environmental 
damage which might have been caused by them. 
170. It should be recalled that an earthquake had occurred in northern Afghanistan on 
30 May, only two days after the nuclear tests, killing over 5000 people and destroying some 
15 000 homes. The interrelationship between Pakistan's nuclear tests and the earthquake 
should become the subject of scientific scrutiny, and Afghanistan hoped that the relevant 
organizations within the United Nations system would look into the matter. 
171. Pakistani expansionism had given rise to regional tensions. Unfortunately, the 
occupation of certain parts of Afghanistan by Taliban mercenaries and Pakistani military 
personnel had made confrontation very probable. Massive human rights violations - such as 
the massacre of thousands of Shi'ite Hazaras during the previous month and the killing of 
Iranian diplomats and an Iranian journalist - had been condemned worldwide. The sad irony 
of it all was that Pakistan was continuing to urge a reluctant international community to 
recognize the Taliban, contrary to the wishes of international humanitarian organizations. 
Pakistan's military circles should abandon their dangerous policy of hegemony. 
The meeting rose at 6.55 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.7 
6 November 1998 
GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE SEVENTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 24 September 1998, at 10.35 a.m. 


President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 

Later: Mr. MIAH (Bangladesh) 

CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 

7 General debate and Annual Report for 1997 (continued) 1-83 

Statements by the delegates of: 

Yemen 1-6 

Niger 7-11 

Venezuela 12-19 

Iraq 20-33 

Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive 

Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 34-40 
Luxembourg 41-46 
Uruguay 47-50 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 51-58 
Greece 59-64 
Portugal 65-68 
Thailand 69-74 
Jordan 75-83 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 

98-03478 (XXXVIII) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 


GC(42)/OR.7 
page 2 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


ASEAN 
Bangkok Treaty 
CTBT 
CTBTO 
CTBTO PrepCom 


DPRK 
EURATOM 
LDC 
NPT 
PTS 


RCA 


RIA 
TCF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 


Trilateral Initiative 


UNSCOM 
VIC 


Abbreviations used in this record 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban 
Treaty Organization 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
European Atomic Energy Community 
Least developed country 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Provisional Technical Secretariat of the Preparatory Commission for the 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization 
Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development and 
Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
(for Asia and the Pacific) 
Radioimmunoassay 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
Trilateral Initiative launched by the Minister of the Russian Federation 
for Atomic Energy, the Secretary of Energy of the United States and the 
Agency's Director General on 17 September 1996 to consider practical 
measures for the application of IAEA verification to fissile material 
originating from nuclear weapons 
United Nations Special Commission 
Vienna International Centre 


GC(42)/OR.7 
page 3 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (continued) 
(GC(42)/5) 


1. Mr. MAKKI (Yemen), having welcomed the admission of Benin to the Agency, 
said that the Agency played a vital role in the peaceful use of nuclear techniques for economic 
and social development in the world, while applying safeguards to prevent the diversion of 
nuclear material for military purposes or the misuse of nuclear technology. The conclusion of 
new international instruments and conventions, as well as the additional protocols to 
comprehensive safeguards agreements, reflected the progress that had been achieved with 
regard to the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons, the banning of nuclear tests, the fight 
against illicit trafficking in nuclear materials and other radioactive sources, and in the area of 
nuclear safety. 
2. Technical co-operation was a key area, especially for the developing countries in general 
and the LDCs in particular. It was therefore essential to strengthen the TCF by encouraging 
Member States, in particular the major donors, to discharge their financial obligations with 
respect to the Fund, and by expanding its resources, either by funding from the Regular 
Budget or by taking other measures to ensure that there was a balance between the Agency's 
activities. 
3. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Yemen favoured expansion 
of the Board of Governors and considered it the right of each regional group to decide on its 
own composition. 
4. Despite the economic climate, Yemen was continuing its policy of administrative, 
financial and economic reform, and was endeavouring to develop a legal framework which 
would enable it to further its relations with the Agency in several areas. Yemen intended to 
sign a comprehensive safeguards agreement and to accede to or ratify the international 
conventions concluded under the auspices of the Agency. He hoped that the Agency would 
provide Yemen with assistance in that regard, particularly because his country lacked 
qualified national staff, equipment, laboratories and material. The Agency's support was also 
essential in fields such as radiation protection, medicine, agriculture, the environment and 
hydrology, and he called upon the Agency to increase and develop the co-operation activities 
that it was already carrying out in Yemen. 
5. Yemen welcomed the results obtained by the Agency with regard to the application of 
safeguards and the implementation of Security Council resolutions. However, it hoped that 
progress would be made in the application of safeguards in the Middle East in order to 
establish the region as a nuclear-weapon-free zone and to rid it of all weapons of mass 
destruction. It was clear that the obstinacy of Israel - a country which had so far refused to 
submit its facilities to inspection and verification - was hindering the application of safeguards 
in the Middle East. It should also be noted that Israel was the only country in the region that 
had not signed the NPT, although it now had a significant nuclear capability that it had used to 
produce nuclear weapons; that was a serious threat to security, stability and peace in the 
region and in the world as a whole. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 4 


6. Yemen therefore called upon the international community to shoulder its responsibilities 
and take every step to make Israel comply with the relevant resolutions of the Security 
Council and General Assembly. The Agency should also take measures, with the same 
resolve and determination that it had demonstrated with regard to Iraq, to persuade Israel to 
submit its nuclear facilities to safeguards and to ensure that it did not develop nuclear 
weapons. Yemen urged Israel to sign the NPT, since such a step would help to increase trust 
among the countries of the region. 
Mr. Miah (Bangladesh) took the Chair. 


7. Mr. ABDOU-SALEYE (Niger) expressed his country's total commitment to the 
ideals and principles of the Agency and its satisfaction with the quality of technical assistance 
it had received in areas such as agriculture, water resources, health, mining, nuclear safety, 
and basic and applied research. Niger welcomed the new orientations, procedures, concepts 
and tools that had been adopted for the Agency's technical co-operation programme. 
8. Despite being the world's third largest producer of uranium, which accounted for 75% 
of its export earnings, Niger was still one of the LDCs and faced great challenges in terms of 
poverty, hunger, thirst, desertification, illiteracy, and maternal and infant mortality. It 
therefore attached great importance to the AFRA programme and, in recognition of the 
Agency's commendable efforts, Niger had, despite its economic difficulties, paid ten years' 
arrears of contributions to the Agency's budget in 1997. 
9. Niger had been a Party to the NPT since October 1992 and negotiations were currently 
under way on the conclusion of a comprehensive safeguards agreement. 
10. In the area of safety, Niger was strengthening its radiation protection infrastructures and 
developing and adopting a number of legislative and regulatory texts relating to protection 
against ionizing radiation. Furthermore, following the establishment of a radiation protection 
laboratory at the uranium mining sites and of the Institute for Radioisotopes, a technical 
advisory committee for radiation protection and nuclear techniques had been established, as 
well as a national radiation protection centre. Very shortly, two radionuclide and 
seismological monitoring stations were due to be set up under the aegis of the CTBTO. 
11. Turning to the question of amendment of Article VI of the Agency's Statute, he said that 
the gap between the industrialized and the developing countries should be reduced, if not 
eliminated. The General Conference should accept the proposal put forward by the 
Group of 77. The changes that had taken place in the world argued in favour of increasing the 
membership of the Board and of reducing the dominant role played by the countries that were 
most advanced in the technology of atomic energy, since the nuclear fuel cycle was the 
concern of all States. 
12. Mr. BOERSNER STEDER (Venezuela), having welcomed Benin, expressed 
support for the Director General's efforts to implement administrative reforms aimed at 
improving the preparation and management of the Agency's programmes. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 5 


13. During the Agency's existence, the capacity of nuclear energy to help resolve or 
ameliorate problems afflicting mankind had been amply demonstrated. The benefits brought 
by nuclear techniques in fields such as crop improvement, potable water production, 
groundwater management and the diagnosis of disease were universally acknowledged. 
Venezuela had encouraged and endorsed the efforts to strengthen technical co-operation, 
which had recently begun to produce a positive impact on the quality of projects submitted for 
approval. 
14. However, those positive results had generated greater demand for funding and 
Venezuela was therefore concerned at the tendency of some donor countries to reduce their 
contributions to the TCF. His delegation accordingly appealed to all Member States not to 
lose sight of the vital importance of the Agency's technical co-operation activities. For its 
part, despite its current financial difficulties, Venezuela had, during the past year, managed to 
clear almost all of its arrears in payments to the Agency. 
15. Venezuela welcomed the recently adopted Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion 
of Nuclear Science and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean, which would support 
the ARCAL programme and constitute a fundamental tool for channelling regional 
co-operation. Venezuela was currently involved in 11 ARCAL projects. 
16. Turning to the content of the Agency's technical co-operation programme, he noted with 
satisfaction that technology transfer and training were now geared to direct participation by 
end-users. The Agency's Model Projects in Venezuela were closely linked to national development 
objectives aimed at improving the population's standard of living, covering areas such 
as screening for neonatal hypothyroidism, animal nutrition and productivity and groundwater 
resources. 
17. Venezuela strictly applied the provisions of the Regulations for the Safe Transport of 
Radioactive Material and, as a party to the Tlatelolco Treaty, had joined with the other States 
of its region in undertaking to promote non-proliferation and the peaceful use of nuclear 
energy. Venezuela was one of the many countries inspired by the ideal of complete 
disarmament, and believed that the NPT constituted the most suitable framework and 
instrument for achieving that objective. Venezuela deplored the recent resumption of nuclear 
testing and appealed to all States to accede to the NPT and to the CTBT, and urged all 
countries - whether parties to the latter treaty or not - to cease such testing. 
18. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, Venezuela continued to 
favour an expansion in Board membership which would allow more equitable representation 
for all regions. He commended the Chairman of the Board of Governors on his efforts to seek 
a consensus solution acceptable to all Member States. 
19. Finally, he expressed his country's unreserved support for the Agency's efforts to 
achieve balanced implementation of its technical co-operation and safeguards activities. 
Venezuela highly appreciated the Agency's commitment to strengthening and extending its 
co-operation with developing countries. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 6 


20. Mr. AL-JANABI (Iraq) noted that seven years had passed since the Agency had 
been authorized by the Security Council in section C of resolution 687 to destroy, remove and 
render harmless the former Iraqi nuclear programme. During that time, the Agency had 
carried out all the missions assigned to it, yet as a result of pressure by the United States, the 
Security Council had not yet taken a decision to transfer the nuclear file from the disarmament 
stage to the monitoring stage. The Agency had regrettably reinforced such pressure by stating 
in its report to the Security Council on 27 July 1998 that the non-existence of indications of 
the availability of prohibited equipment, materials or activities did not rule out their existence. 
It had also raised doubts about Iraq's co-operation and accused it of lack of full transparency. 
21. Iraq had fulfilled its obligations under paragraphs 12 and 13 of section C of Security 
Council resolution 687. The Agency's reports had for years shown that, with the exception of 
some details, its disarmament activities had been completed and that it was at present only 
carrying out monitoring and verification. Indeed, upon completion of the thirteenth IAEA 
on-site inspection mission, the Agency had destroyed and rendered harmless all known key 
facilities and equipment, as stated in paragraph 9 of document GOV/INF/663. The Director 
General, in his report to the Security Council dated 5 April 1995 (reproduced in document 
GOV/INF/770) had indicated in paragraph 47 that the Agency was confident that the essential 
components of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme had been identified and destroyed, 
removed or rendered harmless and that the scope of the past programme was well understood. 
Paragraph 35 of the same document also stated that all weapons-usable nuclear material had 
been removed from Iraq. The on-site inspection missions specified by resolution 687 had 
been completed several years previously and a technically coherent picture of Iraq's former 
nuclear programme had also been developed by the Agency as stated in all its reports on that 
subject. 
22. The on-going monitoring and verification programme had been implemented in practice 
since 1991 inasmuch as the third paragraph on page 2 of the report on the eighth IAEA on-site 
inspection (GOV/INF/641) stated that monitoring activities initiated during the seventh 
inspection mission had continued during the eighth - in other words, before implementation of 
the monitoring plan had officially been initiated in 1994. The Agency had used the most 
advanced technological equipment and procedures in its monitoring and verification 
operations. It had not reported the existence of any prohibited facilities, materials or activities 
or any serious violations, as the Director General had confirmed in his reports and statements 
during the past two years of Agency inspection work in Iraq. Those reports therefore 
confirmed that the essence of section C of resolution 687 had been implemented and that the 
on-going monitoring and verification system was functioning efficiently and with the full 
co-operation of Iraq. Specifically, in paragraph 8 of his report to the Security Council on 
7 October 1996 (reproduced in the Attachment to document GOV/INF/801), the Director 
General had stated that no indication of prohibited equipment, materials or activities had been 
detected, and in paragraph 28 of the same report had stated that the Iraqi counterpart had 
continued to co-operate with the Agency in a productive way. 
23. The Director General's report to the Security Council in July 1998 (reproduced in 
document GOV/INF/1998/16) had also stated, in paragraph 35, that there were no indications 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 7 


of Iraq having retained any physical capability for the indigenous production of 


weapons-usable nuclear material in amounts of any practical significance, nor any indication 
that Iraq had acquired or produced weapons-usable nuclear material. However, the report 
raised secondary topics that were made to sound as if they were outstanding matters that 
prevented the closure of the nuclear file and included certain unfounded claims that caused 
unnecessary suspicions. 

24. In his report submitted to the Security Council on 27 April 1998 (reproduced in the 
Attachment to document GOV/INF/1998/13) the Director General had not raised any such 
suspicions and had stated, in paragraph 30, that the Iraqi counterpart had produced a document 
containing a summary of the technical achievements of its nuclear programme which was 
regarded by the Agency as being consistent with the technically coherent picture of Iraq's 
nuclear programme developed by the Agency in the course of its activities in Iraq. That 
report, therefore, did not indicate any technical obstacles. Nevertheless, three months after 
that report, during which a number of inspection missions had been carried out by the 
Agency's Action Team, the Team had started to abandon the technical procedures adopted by 
the Agency in favour of a political course at the instigation of the United States, a country 
hostile to Iraq. 
25. The Director General had not, as Iraq had hoped, described the positive achievements of 
the monitoring and verification activities during the period from April to July 1998 and Iraq 
was forced to question the motives for the Agency's apparent change of attitude and ask why, 
in the July report, it had started to cast doubts on the efficiency of the monitoring and 
verification system that had been functioning for more than six years. 
26. Iraq's decision on 5 August 1998 to suspend co-operation with UNSCOM and the 
Agency was an objective one and needed to be understood in its proper context. It was based 
on the fundamental fact that Iraq's obligations with respect to the disarmament requirements 
had been fulfilled. In return, Iraq expected the Security Council to start to fulfil its own 
obligations by implementing paragraph 22 of resolution 687 and lifting the sanctions against 
Iraq. In the meantime, as a sign of good will, Iraq was prepared to continue the monitoring 
activities under the terms of resolution 715. 
27. In letters to the President of the Security Council dated 11 August 1998 and 
2 September 1998, the Director General had claimed that the ongoing monitoring and 
verification system could not be fully implemented. Those two letters served to encourage 
hostility against Iraq. Iraq had already clarified its position on the matter in two letters sent by 
its Deputy Prime Minister to the President of the Security Council dated 13 August 1998 and 
7 September 1998. Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister had pointed out that co-operation with the 
Agency was continuing normally and effectively in the area of ongoing monitoring, but that it 
had suspended the disarmament activities which the Agency had confirmed, in paragraph 72 
of document S/1997/779 of 8 October 1997 (reproduced in the Appendix to document 
GOV/INF/827), that it had fully and comprehensively fulfilled; that the Agency was 
conducting inspection activities at 162 sites with the full co-operation of Iraq, although most 
of the sites were not related to nuclear activities; that the Agency was conducting on an almost 
daily basis environmental radioactivity surveys at all industrial facilities, as well as in the 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 8 


streets of Baghdad and other governorates throughout the country to ensure that there was no 
nuclear activity; and that the Agency was now implementing an environmental monitoring 
programme under which two air sampling systems had been installed in Baghdad and another 
six sites designated for the installation of such systems, with Iraq having provided all the 
facilities necessary for the operation of those systems. The Deputy Prime Minister had made 
it clear that there were no grounds for suggesting that the implementation of the ongoing 
monitoring and verification plan was limited. 


28. The Conference should therefore call upon the Agency and its Action Team to tell the 
whole truth and to refrain from raising issues that did not reflect the technical work that had 
been carried out in Iraq. The Agency, for its part, should declare that the Iraqi nuclear file was 
closed. 
29. The joint efforts of Iraq and the Agency had been characterized over the years by 
professional and practical co-operation despite the effects of the sanctions which had caused 
the Iraqi people to suffer from shortages of food and medicine. Death rates had increased 
sharply and serious diseases had spread. During the 1991 war, the United States and British 
forces had used depleted uranium shells against civil and military targets, which had led to 
serious and long-lasting environmental damage. The international community should 
condemn the unforgivable crime that had been perpetrated against Iraq and help mitigate the 
radiation effects. 
30. The Security Council resolutions allowed Iraq to use radioactive isotopes for 
agricultural, industrial and medical purposes. The Agency had offered some technical 
assistance in those fields and Iraq had been hoping that that could be expanded, but the 
political influence of the United States had prevented the implementation of assistance 
programmes. In 1997, Iraq had requested additional technical assistance to eradicate the old 
world screwworm. The amount of technical assistance offered was not enough to combat the 
spread of the epidemic and it was likely that the insect would spread to neighbouring 
countries. Iraq therefore appealed to the General Conference to increase the Agency's 
assistance and speed up the implementation of the screwworm eradication programme. 
31. The Conference should realize that the member of the Sanctions Committee from the 
United States had objected for no good reason to the import of a gamma camera to be used for 
the diagnosis of cancer and to Iraq's participation in the interregional project on saline 
groundwater and wastelands for plant production. It was perfectly clear that such applications 
could hardly be used to develop weapons of mass destruction. 
32. Seven years had elapsed since the adoption of Security Council resolution 687. 
Paragraph 14 of that resolution, calling for the establishment in the Middle East of a zone free 
from weapons of mass destruction, had not been implemented. In a unique precedent, the 
Security Council had demanded in resolution 487 in 1981 that Israel should subject its nuclear 
facilities and installations to Agency safeguards. The fact that Israel had never complied with 
that resolution was evidence of the double standards adopted by the United States in its 
selective implementation of Security Council resolutions. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 9 


33. In conclusion, he urged the General Conference to call upon the Agency to meet its 
obligations in the light of Iraq's compliance with the relevant international resolutions; to 
state the truth, without distorting facts or raising doubts about them; and to refrain from 
writing contradictory or misleading reports. The Agency could thus show itself to be a 
trustworthy and reliable organization committed to the support of the peaceful uses of atomic 
energy for the benefit of mankind. 
34. Mr. HOFFMANN (Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-
Ban Treaty Organization) recalled that negotiations on the CTBT, the aim of which was to 
halt vertical as well as horizontal proliferation, had been concluded in summer 1996 and the 
Provisional Technical Secretariat had started work in March 1997 and, with the signing of the 
Host Country Agreement between the Preparatory Commission and the Republic of Austria 
on 18 March 1997, the CTBTO PrepCom had formally established itself as a new 
international organization in Vienna. The Provisional Technical Secretariat had, from the 
outset, sought to develop co-operative arrangements with the other VIC-based organizations 
and since self-sufficiency in all administrative areas had not initially been feasible, some 
routine operations had been outsourced. It had subsequently become clear that outsourcing 
was not the most cost-effective method and the PTS had reduced the level of outsourcing and 
worked to develop its own facilities for carrying out its various administrative tasks. In 
building up the organization, an attempt had been made to remain lean and to achieve 
maximum flexibility while minimizing its administrative expenses. 
35. Agency expertise had facilitated his organization's work in a number of ways, notably 
through the provision of financial services and advice regarding their implementation through 
the use of rules modelled on those of the Agency. The PTS now had more than 150 staff 
members and all its units were to some extent operational. The CTBTO PrepCom had 
established three subsidiary bodies: working group A on administrative and budgetary 
matters, working group B on verification issues and an advisory group on financial, budgetary 
and associated administrative issues. 
36. According to the CTBT, the verification regime needed to be operational at the time of 
the Treaty's entry into force. The global international monitoring system set the verification 
regime of the CTBT apart from verification measures contained in other treaties. The regime 
would consist of a worldwide network of monitoring stations, an international data centre in 
Vienna, and on-site inspections. A network of 321 seismic, infrasound, hydroacoustic and 
radionuclide stations would gradually be built up over the coming years, and, supported by 
16 radionuclide laboratories, the international monitoring system would be capable of 
registering vibrations underground, in the sea and in the air, as well as detecting traces of 
radionuclides released into the atmosphere from nuclear explosions. Data generated by the 
four complementary technologies would be transmitted via a global communications system 
to the international data centre in Vienna for processing. All the data, raw or processed, 
would be made available to the States Signatories and ambiguous events would be subject to 
consultation and clarification. As a final verification measure, an on-site inspection might be 
requested. The progressive establishment of the international monitoring system was the main 
task of the Preparatory Commission and the Provisional Technical Secretariat. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 10 


37. The international monitoring system had so far been authorized to initiate work at 79 
stations in 29 countries. Training courses and programmes were being held. The international 
data centre was being established progressively: the first seven computer servers had been 
installed in March 1998, with all remaining hardware and commercial software having been 
procured, installed and tested on schedule. During the period of the announced Indian nuclear 
tests - 11 to 13 May 1998 - the Provisional Technical Secretariat had been just in the process 
of installing the software and had therefore not been able to conduct real-time processing and 
analysis of results, but shortly thereafter the international data centre had retrieved the data for 
archiving and test analysis. It received data for both announced Pakistani nuclear explosions 
on 28 and 30 May and automatic processing of seismic data from primary seismic stations had 
provided first estimates of the event location. 
38. The CTBTO had completed procurement and implementation of its global 
communications infrastructure, which would involve routing data directly from the 
international monitoring system stations to the international data centre and, at the same time, 
distributing data and products to States Signatories. In addition, a high-speed link had been 
established between the international data centre and the prototype international data centre in 
Arlington, United States of America. The on-site inspection division had made substantial 
progress on procedures and guidelines, and would be drawing up an operational manual. 
39. The Treaty's ultimate success would depend on its implementation being guaranteed by 
the worldwide verification system so that each State Signatory could be assured that all others 
were adhering to the Treaty or that any violation would be detected, and on it becoming a 
global treaty, with as many countries as possible signing it. With 150 States Signatories, the 
Treaty was rapidly approaching the status of a universal treaty. Twenty-one States, including 
10 of the 44 required for entry into force, had deposited their instruments of ratification with 
the Secretary-General of the United Nations, and the ratification process was well under way 
in other States. It was also essential that the United States of America, the Russian Federation 
and China should ratify the Treaty in addition to France and the United Kingdom, which had 
already done so. 
40. The hope of achieving a world free of nuclear tests had not been thwarted by the recent 
tests carried out by India and Pakistan and he was even optimistic that there would be no 
further nuclear tests. He welcomed the declaration of the Prime Minister of Pakistan that his 
country would join the CTBT and again called on India to join in signing and supporting the 
common efforts to achieve a truly global and definitive ban on nuclear testing. 
41. Mr. SANTER (Luxembourg) welcomed Benin as a new member of the Agency 
and endorsed the statement made by the representative of Austria on behalf of the European 
Union and associated countries, which reflected the Government of Luxembourg's position, in 
particular with regard to the nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan and the regional 
tensions caused by Iraq and the DPRK in not fulfilling their international obligations. 
42. He was pleased to have been able to sign the additional protocol for Luxembourg the 
previous Tuesday alongside his European Union colleagues, since it was during 
Luxembourg's presidency of the European Union in the second half of 1997 that his 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 11 


Government had decided to give priority to efforts within the Union to bring about the early 
signature of additional protocols. He also hoped that the co-operation between the Agency 
and EURATOM, whose Safeguards Directorate was in Luxembourg, would continue to 
contribute to substantial savings for the Agency's budget while maintaining the effectiveness 
of the strengthened safeguards system. 

43. Turning to the Convention on Nuclear Safety, he said that he looked forward to the 
organizational meeting of the Contracting Parties due to be held the following week in 
accordance with the Convention's provisions. He was convinced that the Convention would 
make a significant contribution to strengthening the safety of nuclear power plants in the 
world and urged all States, especially those which had nuclear power plants, to become parties 
to the Convention without delay and without conditions. One of the important provisions of 
the Convention on Nuclear Safety was the periodic review meetings to examine national 
reports by all the Contracting Parties in order to check that they were fulfilling their 
obligations under the Convention. Luxembourg looked forward with interest to the first 
review meeting which would take place in spring 1999. 
44. He appealed to all States which had not yet done so to become parties without delay to 
the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management in order to allow that important instrument to enter into force 
quickly. 
45. Finally, he appealed to all States which were not yet parties to the legal nuclear 
non-proliferation instruments to become parties without delay, in the interests of peace and 
regional and global security. He hoped also that the negotiations on a fissile material cut-off 
treaty would soon come to a successful conclusion and noted that the Agency, by virtue of its 
experience and expertise, would be the key partner in implementing the treaty's verification 
system. 
46. The entry into force of important conventions, the adoption of new legal instruments 
and the allocation of new tasks to the Agency would enhance the already prestigious image of 
the Agency, which was an international institution serving the interests of nuclear safety, 
security and non-proliferation, as well as the economic and social development of humanity. 
47. Mr. SERVIAN (Uruguay), after welcoming Benin to membership of the Agency, 
said that, in the sphere of nuclear applications, Uruguay had concentrated on projects intended 
to achieve specific results in areas such as animal and plant production, the control of animal 
diseases, environmental contamination, and health. Uruguay had succeeded in achieving a 
100% screening rate for the early detection of neonatal hypothyroidism, which affected 1 child 
in 1000 in iodine-deficient regions, using RIA techniques developed with Agency assistance. 
48. In the field of radiation protection, Uruguay was continuing its programme of training 
and activities to upgrade protection. With regard to nuclear safety, he said that the spent 
nuclear fuel from Uruguay's research reactor had recently been removed from the country and 
he thanked the United States Department of Energy for making that possible, and the Agency 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 12 


and its Department of Safeguards, which had supervised the fuel shipment operation with 
speed and efficiency. 


49. It was nearly 60 years since the discovery of nuclear fission had initiated a chain of 
events that included the invention, use and refinement of nuclear weapons, as well as the 
establishment of the Agency. It was to be hoped that a concerted effort could be made to 
ensure that the beginning of the next century became known as the era when such weapons 
were eliminated. In that regard, the increasing number of accessions to the NPT and CTBT 
were welcome developments. However, there was also bad news such as the continuing 
horizontal proliferation exemplified by the recent nuclear tests, the delay in eliminating 
nuclear arsenals, and the recent threat posed by illicit trafficking in nuclear material. In order 
to free the world of nuclear weapons, it would be necessary to introduce a series of measures, 
including an international ban on the production of fissionable nuclides that could be used to 
produce nuclear weapons, undertakings not to threaten to use such weapons or to use them 
first, greater controls, and the establishment of more nuclear-weapon-free zones. Uruguay had 
confirmed its commitment to non-proliferation by signing the NPT, the CTBT and an 
additional protocol to its safeguards agreement. 
50. Finally, he reiterated his country's support for the Agency's technical co-operation 
activities and for the Agency's efforts to improve their effectiveness and efficiency. For its 
part, Uruguay intended to pledge a contribution to the TCF. 
51. Mr. ABDULAATI (Libyan Arab Jamahiriya), having welcomed Benin's 
admission to the Agency, commended the Director General on the new approach to technical 
co-operation. It was not easy to reconcile the Agency's Statute with the Member States' 
desire that the Agency's contribution to the improvement of living standards and to 
sustainable development should be strengthened, and that a balance should be established 
between verification activities and technical co-operation. 
52. His country attached great importance to the technical co-operation activities carried out 
by the Agency in all fields of nuclear energy utilization. He welcomed the projects being 
implemented, but recalled that technology transfer to his country had suffered owing to the 
unjust embargo which had been imposed on it. As a result, there had been delays in a large 
number of projects and a freeze on others, such as the one concerned with non-destructive 
testing. The continuation of the total embargo was retarding his country's technological 
development and was generating considerable health problems through the lack of 
Pharmaceuticals. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya hoped that the Agency would take the 
necessary steps to restart the project on non-destructive testing and allow Libyan engineers to 
attend training courses organized by the Agency on that subject. 
53. As a result of the freeze on its assets, his country was experiencing enormous difficulties 
in fulfilling its financial obligations to international organizations, including the Agency, and 
co-operation with the Agency was being hampered. Nevertheless, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya 
had taken all the necessary steps to fulfil its financial obligations to the Agency by paying its 
contribution to the Regular Budget for 1998 and its share of the target for the TCF for 1998. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 13 


54. There were many developing countries like his own which would not be able to meet 
their growing energy needs over the coming decades without exploiting nuclear power. Small 
and medium-sized reactors were well suited to the level of consumption in small countries. It 
was therefore essential to give such reactors greater priority, particularly since they could also 
be used for potable water production. His country also wished to use nuclear techniques for 
ground water exploration, and he stressed the importance of hydrological projects, particularly 
in countries with acute water shortages. 
55. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya welcomed the steps that the Agency had taken to strengthen 
international co-operation in nuclear and radiation safety, the safe transport and management 
of radioactive waste, and in tackling illicit trafficking in nuclear materials. 
56. His country also attached great importance to nuclear disarmament matters because 
weapons of mass destruction were a threat to international peace and security. In international 
forums it had thus always advocated the establishment of a nuclear-weapon-free zone in the 
Middle East. In that regard, it was vitally important to persuade Israel, the only State in the 
region which possessed nuclear weapons, to place its nuclear facilities under Agency 
safeguards in accordance with the NPT. There could be no peace in the Middle East as long 
as certain powers continued to support Israel. That being so, international organizations 
should abandon their discriminatory approach to the implementation of international 
resolutions, and the General Conference should take the measures needed to ensure that Israel 
complied with the wishes of the international community and implemented the relevant 
international resolutions. 
57. Turning to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he said that the changes which 
had taken place on the international scene provided grounds for advocating Board expansion, 
particularly since an expansion would increase the Board's credibility and moral and political 
authority. Africa was the poor relation when it came to representation on the Board, a state of 
affairs acknowledged by resolution GC(XXV)/RES/389, which had recommended that a 
solution be found. The reservations still being expressed by certain delegations were 
unjustified and the linkage being made between expansion of the Board and the composition 
of regional groups constituted an unacceptable delaying tactic, given the tragic situation in the 
Middle East. His delegation supported the Africa Group's position with regard to the number 
of additional seats, and the Arab countries' position with regard to the composition of regional 
groups. 
58. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya welcomed the Agency's efforts to strengthen the 
effectiveness of the safeguards system and to improve its efficiency through the strengthened 
safeguards system, whose objective was to ensure the non-proliferation of nuclear weapons. 
However, the very fact that reference was made to non-proliferation rather than the 
elimination of weapons of mass destruction amounted to explicit recognition of the right of 
certain countries to possess such weapons, a situation which constituted flagrant 
discrimination and left the spectre of mass destruction to roam free. The Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya believed that all weapons of mass destruction had to be destroyed before 
Programme 93+2 could become truly universal in scope. Israel's nuclear arsenal was subject 
neither to Agency safeguards nor to any other sort of international control. If the situation was 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 14 


not remedied, safeguards would only serve to allow a few countries which possessed nuclear 
weapons to assert their domination over others. 


Ms. Lajous Vargas (Mexico) resumed the Chair. 


59. Mr. YENNIMATAS (Greece), having endorsed the statement made on behalf of 
the European Union, said that Greece had already signed the additional protocol to its 
safeguards agreement with EURATOM and the Agency. The measures foreseen in the 
Protocol, together with those already applied, provided the basis for a strengthened and more 
cost-effective safeguards system. However, it was essential to promote the universality of the 
safeguards regime. He therefore hoped that countries with substantial nuclear activities would 
before long accept the strengthened and integrated system of safeguards and enable the 
Agency to implement the system in a comprehensive and credible manner. The idea of a 
special fund to finance the Agency's expanded safeguards programme needed careful 
consideration. Greece welcomed the Trilateral Initiative launched by the Russian Federation, 
the United States of America and the Agency to explore ways and means of verifying that 
nuclear materials removed from weapons programmes were not returned to military use, and 
welcomed the initiative of certain countries with respect to the management of civil plutonium 
as a step towards greater transparency, which in turn contributed to further strengthening the 
international non-proliferation regime. It hoped that an agreement would soon result from the 
work of the ad hoc committee set up to negotiate a fissile material cut-off treaty and 
welcomed the decision of India and Pakistan to participate in those negotiations. 

60. Turning to the area of nuclear safety, he stressed the important role played by the 
Agency in supporting intergovernmental efforts to strengthen nuclear safety worldwide by 
preparing for the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety and by fostering the 
exchange of information and developing common safety standards. However, the Agency's 
role in nuclear safety issues worldwide had not been properly explored in the Convention on 
Nuclear Safety, and should be enhanced, since a number of events in the past year had 
highlighted the need for continuous efforts to maintain and improve safety. Although the 
overall safety trend was positive, Greece felt that special attention should be given to the older 
types of reactors and particularly those which had almost reached the end of their lifetime. It 
was important to expand the Agency's programme on the decommissioning of nuclear 
facilities beyond the training and consultative stage, and to deal with practical problems 
related to the decommissioning process and to provide the necessary assistance with respect to 
safety issues. The Agency's role should also be expanded so as to embrace an impartial 
overview of the general safety and seismological aspects of national programmes for the 
future introduction of nuclear power. Although Greece had signed the Joint Convention on 
the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, it 
regretted the fact that reprocessing facilities had not been included in the Convention. 
61. Greece would like the Agency to undertake, in co-operation with Member States, more 
programmes related to the evaluation of border monitoring systems, particularly at sensitive 
borders, to deal with trafficking in nuclear material and radioactive sources. The Agency 
should accelerate its assistance to States in improving their physical protection measures for 
nuclear material at facilities and during transport. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 15 


62. The Agency's Annual Report for 1997 contained statistics relating to staffing, and while 
those concerning geographical distribution and the recruitment of women in the Professional 
category showed substantial improvement, the situation as far as Greece was concerned was 
not satisfactory. All applications submitted by Greek nationals for Secretariat posts had been 
systematically turned down, and his delegation urged the Director General to pay greater 
attention to its concerns in the matter. 
63. Turning to national activities, he said that Greece had signed an agreement with 
Romania for early notification in the event of a nuclear accident and had renewed a five-year 
agreement with the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission for the exchange of 
technical information and co-operation in nuclear safety matters. The Greek Atomic Energy 
Commission was making preparations to harmonize existing Greek radiation protection 
regulations with the new European Union regulations in that area. Greece was also 
completing installation of an automatic telemetric radiation monitoring system covering the 
whole country as part of its efforts to strengthen its emergency preparedness. In addition, it 
had upgraded its two-year postgraduate programme for the training of scientists and 
technicians in the field of radiation protection, and was organizing special training seminars 
for radiation workers. 
64. Finally, he said that Greece approved both the Agency's Annual Report for 1997 and the 
Programme and Budget for 1999 and 2000, and shared the Director General's view that a 
slight increase in the Regular Budget would be required to enable him to implement the 
Agency's important statutory functions and activities in order to avoid most of them being 
financed from extrabudgetary resources. The higher the percentage of extrabudgetary 
resources, the more difficult it would be to manage the Agency as a whole and for it to carry 
out its duties in accordance with the views of all Member States without discrimination. 
65. Mr. MENDONA E MOURA (Portugal), having welcomed Benin as a new 
member of the Agency and endorsed the statement made on behalf of the European Union and 
associated countries, expressed appreciation of the Agency's continued efforts to improve the 
effectiveness and efficiency of the technical co-operation programme through internal 
measures, such as restructuring the Department, as well as measures in recipient States. It 
supported the steps taken to overcome difficulties in obtaining the funds needed to cover 
planned activities and regretted that the current restrictions were hampering the expansion of 
activities which everyone wanted see. 
66. More than 60% of technical co-operation expenditure related to sectors such as food, 
agriculture, health, water resources and industrial applications and it seemed unlikely that 
public opinion was aware of the extent and variety of the non-power applications of nuclear 
energy. The Agency's public information initiatives were therefore very important, especially 
the provision of information via the Internet, and via other media in areas where Internet 
access was not widespread. 
67. He welcomed the progress made in strengthening safeguards over the past year and the 
efforts of both the Agency and Member States which had led to the signing of 32 additional 
protocols, including ones relating to the European Union countries, of which two were 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 16 


nuclear-weapon States. However, he regretted the fact that there were still some States which 
were not parties to the NPT, the nuclear tests that had been conducted, the DPRK's lack of 
co-operation with the Agency and Iraq's refusal to grant Agency inspectors access to sites 
which had not been inspected before. 

68. Nevertheless, the Agency and the majority of Member States had come a long way 
towards creating a world where all nuclear materials would be subject to independent 
verification so that the spectre of nuclear destruction would be banished for ever. 
69. Mr. PROMPOJ (Thailand) said that all the people of his region aspired to a South 
East Asia that was free of nuclear weapons. For the Bangkok Treaty to be truly meaningful, 
the co-operation and support of all nuclear-weapon States with respect to the Protocol to the 
Treaty were essential. Consultations between the States Parties to the Treaty and the nuclearweapon 
States to find a mutually agreeable solution were under way. 
70. The Association of Southeast Asian Nations was interested in the issue of nuclear safety 
and waste management, and had set up a working group to study the possibilities for ASEAN 
co-operation in that area. The group recognized the Agency's important role and regarded the 
possible ASEAN framework of co-operation as a complementary mechanism at the regional 
level which would lead to increased co-operation between ASEAN and the Agency. 
71. Thailand was deeply concerned about the nuclear tests undertaken by India and 
Pakistan, which had undermined international efforts to ban such tests and reduce nuclear 
weapons. Thailand welcomed the announcement by Pakistan in the General Assembly of the 
United Nations that it would adhere to the CTBT, and hoped that consultations between India 
and Pakistan would lead to substantive progress towards them both joining the NPT and 
CTBT as soon as possible. The nuclear tests underscored the importance and necessity of an 
effective verification regime, and Thailand believed that the CTBTO verification regime and 
the Agency's strengthened safeguards system should be implemented in a complementary 
manner aimed at creating the cornerstone of the global arms control regime. The Agency and 
the CTBTO should work closely together and wherever possible share expertise, experiences 
and other resources. 
72. Despite the global economic and financial difficulties, which had had an extensive and 
deep impact on the Thai economy, Thailand was determined to pay its contributions to the 
Agency in full and to pay its share of the target of the TCF for 1999. He urged all Member 
States to make full and timely payment of their assessed contributions, and implored donor 
countries to maintain their generous assistance to developing countries under bilateral or 
multilateral technical co-operation frameworks. 
73. As a developing country, Thailand had benefited substantially from the peaceful use of 
nuclear energy for its economic and technological development, mainly through technical 
co-operation programmes under the auspices of the Agency or the RCA. One notable success 
in the area of public health was the neonatal screening programme for the early detection of 
iodine deficiency to prevent hypothyroidism, which was expected to cover all newborn babies 
by the year 2000. 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 17 


74. As the new millennium approached, there should be no excuse for nuclear armaments, 
as nations realized that their enemies lay not beyond their borders but within them, in the 
myriad forms of poverty, ignorance, economic and social problems, and a deteriorating 
environment. Although Thailand did not yet have a nuclear power plant, the issue of nuclear 
power was still the subject of policy study and discussion. There had been lively debates in 
government and academic circles, as well as with non-governmental organizations and the 
general public. It was therefore essential for Thailand to have a programme for the 
dissemination of accurate public information, and it was grateful for the Agency's offer to 
assist in implementing its public information programme with extrabudgetary funding from 
Japan. 
75. Mr. TWAL (Jordan), having welcomed the admission of Benin to the Agency, 
said that the Agency should place greater emphasis on regional co-operation, particularly in 
the areas of laboratory analyses and the provision of advisory services, especially for projects 
of economic and social benefit. 
76. Jordan greatly appreciated the Agency's efforts in various fields, including the 
strengthening of international co-operation through the elaboration of conventions such as the 
Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident, the Convention on Nuclear Safety, 
and the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent Fuel Management and on the Safety of 
Radioactive Waste Management. 
77. The Agency should strengthen its activities in the Middle East with a view to extending 
the application of comprehensive safeguards agreements to all nuclear facilities in the region 
as a first step towards transforming the region into a nuclear-weapon-free zone and to 
eliminating all weapons of mass destruction from it. He commended the Director General on 
his untiring efforts in that regard. 
78. Jordan had met all its commitments in connection with the nuclear non-proliferation 
regime. After having signed the NPT in 1968 and ratified it in 1974, Jordan had signed 
the CTBT in September 1996 and had ratified it the previous month; furthermore, it had just 
signed an additional protocol to its comprehensive safeguards agreement. 
79. Nuclear activities, tests, accidents and various peaceful applications of nuclear energy in 
certain countries had led to the accumulation of large amounts of radioactive waste and 
environmental contamination in other countries lacking such techniques. There was a moral 
obligation towards future generations to solve those problems. 
80. With regard to technical co-operation, Jordan favoured the concept of Model Projects; 
emphasis should be given to the development of human resources in developing countries, 
particularly with regard to the maintenance and repair of nuclear equipment. It might be 
useful to establish regional centres in order to strengthen national capabilities in that area. 
81. Potable water was one of the major problems facing the developing countries: it was 
scarce and shortages were exacerbated by increased demand resulting from population 
growth - a phenomenon sometimes caused by huge influxes of refugees. Seawater 

GC(42)/OR.7 
page 18 


desalination was one of the possible solutions to this problem. He welcomed the plans to 
produce potable water economically using nuclear techniques, and pointed out that it would be 
even more useful to use nuclear reactors to produce both electricity and potable water. In that 
way, the Agency could also help to resolve the energy problems facing several Member States. 


82. With regard to the amendment of Article VI of the Statute, he said that the issue of 
equitable representation for the regions of Africa and of the Middle East and South Asia in the 
Board of Governors was more necessary than ever, since the members of those regions had 
made substantial progress in the nuclear area. 
83. The Arab Atomic Energy Agency, whose headquarters were in Tunis, was a regional 
organization providing scientific and technical services in the area of the peaceful uses of 
nuclear energy. However, the volume and quality of the assistance that it provided were 
suffering because of its shortage of financial resources. Jordan therefore called upon the 
Agency to provide more support to that organization. 
The meeting rose at 1.10 p.m. 



GC(42)/OR.8 
7 January 1999 
GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

ENGLISH 


GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: FRENCH 


FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE EIGHTH PLENARY MEETING 

Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Thursday, 24 September 1998, at 3.10 p.m. 
President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 
Later: Mr. MADUNA (South Africa) 
CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* 
Paragraphs 
8 
Election of Members to the Board of Governors 1 -15 
7 
General debate and Annual Report for 1997 (resumed) 16-73 
Statements made by the delegates of: 
Paraguay 
Armenia 
Guatemala 
Colombia 
Cyprus 
Nigeria 
Nicaragua 
Ethiopia 
League of Arab States 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in 
Latin America and the Caribbean 
16-20 
21 -27 
28-38 
39-44 
45-50 
51 -56 
57-60 
61 -66 
67 
68-73 

[*] GC(42)/20. 


The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 
98-03484 (XXXIX) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 


AFRA 


ARCAL 


Bangkok Treaty 
CTBT 
IMS 
MESA 
NPT 


NPT Review and 
Extension Conference 
OPANAL 


OPEC 
Pelindaba Treaty 
Rarotonga Treaty 
TCDC 
TCF 
Tlatelolco Treaty 


UNDP 


GC(42)/OR.8 
page 3 


Abbreviations used in this record 


African Regional Co-operative Agreement for Research, Development 
and Training Related to Nuclear Science and Technology 
Regional Co-operation Agreement for the Promotion of Nuclear Science 
and Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean 
Treaty on the Southeast Asia Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone 
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty 
International Nuclear Information System 
Middle East and South Asia 
Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 

Review and Extension Conference of the Parties to the Treaty on the 

Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 
Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and 
the Caribbean 
Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries 
African Nuclear-Weapon-FreeZone Treaty 
South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty 
Technical co-operation among developing countries 
Technical Co-operation Fund 
Treaty for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin America and the 
Caribbean 
United Nations Development Programme 


GC(42)/OR.8 
page 4 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS 
(GC(42)/9 and GC(42)/21) 


1. The PRESIDENT recalled that in 1989 the General Conference had approved a 
procedure whereby, when there was agreement regarding the candidate or candidates from a 
particular area, no secret ballot was held; balloting only took place for those areas where no 
candidate had been agreed upon. That procedure facilitated the efficient use of the General 
Conference's time. Accordingly, she proposed that Rule 79 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
General Conference, which provided that elections to the Board should be by secret ballot, be 
suspended in respect of those areas for which there was agreement. 
2. Mr. HOBEICA (Lebanon), speaking on behalf of the League of Arab States, 
requested the President to defer the election of the floating seat, which that year fell to the 
MESA Group, until the following day, since negotiations and consultations were still being 
held in the Arab Group. 
3. The PRESIDENT, having agreed to that request, proposed to follow the 
above-mentioned procedure for the election of members to the Board of Governors in respect 
of the areas for which there was agreement. Drawing attention to document GC(42)/9, 
containing a list of the Agency Member States which the Board of Governors had designated 
to serve on the Board from the end of the Conference's present session until the end of the 
following session, she recalled that, under Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure, she had to 
indicate to the General Conference those elective places on the Board which had to be filled 
and, in that connection, invited delegates to refer to document GC(42)/21. 

4. She took it that the General Conference wished to elect Brazil, Chile and Uruguay to the 
three vacant seats for Latin America. 
5. Brazil, Chile and Uruguay were duly elected. 
6. The PRESIDENT took it that the General Conference wished to elect Norway and 
Greece to the two vacant seats for Western Europe. 
7. Norway and Greece were duly elected. 
8. The PRESIDENT took it that General Conference wished to elect Slovakia to the 
vacant seat for Eastern Europe. 
9. Slovakia was duly elected. 
10. The PRESIDENT took it that General Conference wished to elect Egypt and 
Sudan to the two vacant seats for Africa. 
11. Egypt and Sudan were duly elected. 
12. The PRESIDENT took it that General Conference wished to elect Saudi Arabia to 
the vacant seat for the Middle East and South Asia. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 5 


13. Saudi Arabia was duly elected. 
14. The PRESIDENT took it that General Conference wished to elect Singapore to the 
vacant seat for South East Asia and the Pacific. 
i 5. Singapore was duly elected. 


GENERAL DEBATE AND ANNUAL REPORT FOR 1997 (resumed) 
(GC(42)/5) 


16. Ms. ROMERO de GONZILEZ (Paraguay), having welcomed the admission of 
Benin to the Agency, said that Paraguay, which continued to benefit from international 
technical co-operation in the area of nuclear energy, paid tribute to the way in which the 
Agency carried out its task of promoting atomic energy for the peace, health and prosperity of 
all, while ensuring, so far as it was able, that the assistance provided by it or at its request or 
under its auspices was not used for military purposes. For that reason, Paraguay supported the 
Agency's safeguards activities. 
17. Paraguay was participating in various technical co-operation projects that were of 
considerable importance to it through public bodies such as the Ministry of Public Health and 
Social Welfare (quality control of radiopharmaceuticals and improvement of brachytherapy), 
the Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock (feed supplementation for improving cattle 
productivity), the National Animal Health Secretariat (project on foot-and-mouth disease), and 
the Sanitary Works Corporation (use of tracers in water supply and pollution studies and the 
use of isotopes in groundwater studies in two regions of Paraguay). In addition, the National 
Atomic Energy Commission and the Ministry of Public Health and Social Welfare were 
continuing to participate in the interregional project on radiation protection: they were 
involved in drawing up a unified document that would constitute the national regulations for 
protection against ionizing radiation and for the safety of radiation sources, and that would be 
used by the two bodies. Furthermore, as part of the interregional project on sustainable 
technologies for managing radioactive wastes, a programme for the conditioning of spent 
radium sources was to be implemented as from October 1998. 
18. Paraguay was continuing to participate in all the activities carried out as part of the 
ARCAL programme, and like its partners, had endorsed the steps taken in preparation for the 
conclusion of an intergovernmental agreement that would make it possible to gain further 
benefit from the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. That agreement had just been approved by 
the Board of Governors and a decisive step had thus been taken towards the strengthening of 
the ARCAL programme, as a result of which the countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean would be able to co-operate under excellent conditions. 
19. The Faculty of Chemistry at the National University of Asuncion now offered a course 
in radiopharmacy, which took account of the recommendations made during the workshop 
organized in Peru in November 1997 within the framework of the ARCAL programme. 
Furthermore, in connection with an ARCAL project on food irradiation in the countries of the 
Southern Cone, seminars for health professionals had been organized in collaboration with the 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 6 


Institute of Food and Nutrition; the participants, approximately 60 in number, had studied the 
model regulations on irradiated food for Latin America and the Caribbean adopted by the 
International Consultative Group on Food Irradiation. The National Institute for Technology 
and Standardization had been informed of the results of the work so that it could use them as a 
point of departure for the preparation of new regulations with a view to harmonization at the 
regional level. Furthermore, a conference on food irradiation had been organized for 
Paraguayan industrialists to stimulate their interest in that technique of food preservation. In 
July 1998, the National Atomic Energy Commission had held an open day with the primary 
objective of providing information on the activities in progress under the ARCAL programme: 
the project co-ordinators had talked about their work and the results obtained. The projects in 
which Paraguay was participating covered areas such as the production and control of 
radiopharmaceuticals, nuclear medicine, radiotherapy, nuclear instrumentation, the use of 
radioimmunoassay for research on animal products and the marketing of those products, and 
nuclear information. The Nuclear Information Centre at the National Atomic Energy 
Commission, which represented INIS in Paraguay, offered users information research services 
on INIS CD-ROMs, and ensured the selective dissemination of that information as well as 
access to the INIS Internet pages and databases. The libraries at the National University of 
Asuncion were involved in those activities, in co-operation with the National Agronomy 
Library, the Health Science Research Institute, the Technical Planning Secretariat and the 
United Nations Information Centre in Paraguay. 

20. In conclusion, she thanked the Agency for its untiring support for the implementation of 
a whole series of projects which made an important contribution to sustainable development 
in Paraguay. 
Mr. Maduna (South Africa) took the Chair. 

21. Mr. MKRTCHIAN (Armenia), having welcomed Benin as a new member of the 
Agency, said that he was pleased to announce that Armenia had deposited its instrument of 
ratification of the Convention on Nuclear Safety on the first day of the General Conference. 
The Armenian Nuclear Regulatory Authority was currently preparing the national report to be 
submitted in accordance with the Convention, and the Armenian delegation was looking 
forward to taking an active part in the first review conference in April 1999. 
22. His delegation fully associated itself with other delegations in denouncing the nuclear 
tests carried out in South Asia in May. It was particularly concerned about the possible 
negative consequences of those tests on the international non-proliferation regime and on the 
commitment of the nuclear-weapon States to reduce their nuclear arsenals further. It was 
pleased that no other tests had been planned, and urged the two States concerned to sign the 
CTBT. Armenia was convinced that once that step had been taken, the entry into force of the 
CTBT and the rapid conclusion of a fissile material cut-off treaty would provide the declared 
nuclear-weapon States with the necessary prerequisites for rapid decisive action towards 
fulfilling their obligations under Article VI of the NPT. 
23. Armenia's policy with regard to nuclear weapons and other weapons of mass destruction 
was clear and consistent, since it was based on a serious and genuine commitment to the 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 7 


objectives and principles of non-proliferation. On 24 September 1991, exactly three days after 
the country had declared independence, the Armenian Parliament had adopted the decision to 
accede to the NPT. Shortly afterwards, Armenia had concluded a comprehensive safeguards 
agreement with the Agency. Since that agreement's entry into force on 5 May 1994, all 
Armenia's nuclear material subject to the agreement had been placed under full-scope Agency 
safeguards. During the NPT Review and Extension Conference in 1995, Armenia, which was 
in favour of the Treaty's indefinite extension, had co-sponsored the Canadian resolution that 
had enabled the Conference to take a consensus decision to that effect. 

24. Armenia was eager to strengthen the international nuclear non-proliferation regime, and 
had been the first State with an operating nuclear power plant to sign, on 29 September 1997, 
an additional protocol based on the model approved by the Board of Governors in April 1997. 
Signature of additional protocols by an increasing number of States with exemplary nonproliferation 
behaviour would serve two purposes: firstly, to subject the part of the nuclear 
fuel cycle currently under comprehensive safeguards to strengthened safeguards; and, 
secondly, to establish a new international standard and exert the necessary influence on States 
inclined to carry out undeclared nuclear activities to ensure that they respected that standard. 
Thus, the Armenian delegation urged all States that had not yet done so to conclude, in the 
near future, an additional protocol to their safeguards agreement with the Agency. For its part, 
Armenia had already begun the constitutional process for ratification of the protocol and the 
matter would be brought before Parliament at the autumn 1998 session. 
25. The Agency's technical co-operation programme contributed greatly to the sustainable 
development of the developing countries and Armenia wished to thank all the donor countries 
that had helped the newly independent States to improve their technological and scientific 
knowledge in areas such as the peaceful use of nuclear energy, the elaboration of operational 
safety standards, occupational radiation protection in nuclear power plants, seismic safety and 
the training of staff. It hoped that they would continue to make contributions to the TCF in 
the next few years to enable the newly independent States to continue to strengthen their 
national infrastructure and train their staff to ensure the safe use of nuclear energy and the 
harmonization of their operating standards with those laid down by the Agency. 
26. Despite the serious economic difficulties that Armenia was facing, it had been able to 
pay its contributions to the Regular Budget and the TCF. In 1998, it had paid US $92 000 to 
the TCF - part of that amount had been to clear its arrears of assessed programme costs and 
the rest had been a voluntary contribution. The previous week, the Armenian Government 
had formally pledged to pay in full its share of the TCF target for 1999. 
27. In conclusion, he thanked the Department of Technical Co-operation, the Department of 
Safeguards and the Legal Division for the very useful and productive discussions they had had 
with the Armenian delegation during the General Conference, and the entire Secretariat for the 
excellent organization of the Conference. 
28. Mr. URRUELA PRADO (Guatemala) said that as part of the country's general 
reorganization, a new General Directorate for Energy that was better suited to current needs 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 8 


had been established. The modernization process also encompassed other areas of the 
Ministry of Energy. 


29. For a long time, Guatemala had attached importance to the development of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy in various areas, which had helped to improve the population's quality 
of life and had contributed to the country's sustainable socio-economic development. In 1997 
and 1998, the radiation safety programme had been developed with the licensing of different 
activities involving radiation and the conclusion of new co-operation agreements with 
different universities in the country to strengthen teaching capabilities and the use of nuclear 
applications in the areas of radiation safety and dosimetry. 
30. The interregional projects on radiation protection and radioactive waste management 
had made it possible to update the inventory of radiation sources. The establishment of 
regulations and standards had continued and Guatemalan specialists and technicians had 
continued to attend seminars and courses to further their knowledge in that area. The 
Guatemalan Government had also benefited from co-operation with the Brazilian Government 
and the Agency on the conditioning of discarded radium-226 sources. 
31. The General Directorate for Energy had contributed to the development of the industrial 
sector through its laboratories for nuclear analysis, non-destructive testing and gamma 
spectrometry. The nuclear analytical laboratory had made it possible to perform rapid analysis 
of samples using total reflection X-ray fluorescence as part of studies involving the 
metallurgical, mining, food and petroleum industries. The non-destructive testing laboratory 
inspected structures and different types of metal objects and implemented quality control 
programmes. 
32. With regard to the environment, in addition to the use of chemical and traditional 
methods, the development of nuclear techniques such as radioactive tracers had made it 
possible to study contamination and eutrophication of various water bodies in the country, to 
monitor greenhouse gases and to quantify environmentally hazardous metals. 
33. Turning to interinstitutional co-operation, he drew attention to the action undertaken, 
together with the United States Department of Agriculture, which had led to the successful 
control of the Mediterranean fruit fly under the MOSCAMED programme. In that connection, 
the El Pino centre of excellence was currently developing a new strain which should permit 
even more effective control of fruit flies in the area under study. Sterile pupae were currently 
being exported to the United States, Israel and Latin America. Furthermore, each year the 
centre provided training to fellowship students from around the world in systems and 
techniques related to its work. 
34. In the area of health, progress in diagnostic imaging and endocrinology using 
radioimmunoassay had enabled the nuclear medicine departments in the country to make that 
technique available to all and to treat thousands of patients. Furthermore, it was expected that 
the upgrading of gamma cameras within the framework of the ARCAL programme would 
make it possible to increase the number of diagnoses by dynamic imaging. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 9 


35. In the area of radiopharmacy, activities concerned, on the one hand, the preparation and 
production of freeze-dried radiopharmaceuticals to supply all the nuclear medicine centres in 
the country, and, on the other, the development of research projects for the production of new 
radiopharmaceuticals for therapy and diagnosis. 
36. The National Cancer Institute had recently received, through the ARCAL programme 
and the technical co-operation programme, new equipment and radiation sources to treat, in 
particular, cervical cancer, the second most common cause of death among women in 
Guatemala. At the same time, radiotherapy quality control programmes had been established, 
as well as a programme for the training of specialists and technicians. 
37. In the agricultural sector, the Guatemalan Agricultural Science and Technology Institute 
had developed improved varieties of plants using biotechnology and radiation-induced 
mutations. Agricultural research to improve the nutritional quality of various species, such as 
the bean, which was part of the staple diet of the Guatemalan people, had led to the marketing 
of several products. Similar research had also been carried out on wheat and other food 
plants. 
38. Guatemala had participated in the ARCAL programme by organizing regional meetings, 
co-operating with countries of the region and also receiving their assistance, and it supported 
the strategies to ensure the programme's future. Finally, he noted that the Agency's assistance 
had made a major contribution to the development of nuclear applications in Guatemala. His 
Government was committed to providing the necessary support to the technical co-operation 
programme in order to achieve the desired objectives and to paying its voluntary contribution 
to the TCF. 
39. Mr. TRUJILLO GARCIA (Colombia) welcomed the election of a representative 
of Mexico as the President of the General Conference. Drawing attention to the restructuring 
of the bodies responsible for Colombian nuclear policy, launched in 1997, he said that the 
Government had started by enacting two decrees to allocate the tasks of the Institute of 
Nuclear Science and Alternative Energy (INEA), which was part of the Ministry of Mines and 
Energy, and those of the Research Institute for Geological Sciences, Mining and Chemistry 
(INGEOMINAS). The Agency had sent an expert mission to Colombia to assess the physical 
safety of the nuclear reactor, as well as the quality of the inspection and licensing system. The 
visit had provided Colombia with new information for a review of the organization of its 
nuclear infrastructure and it was now necessary to make the required corrections and 
adaptations. He hoped that the work would enable his country to strengthen its co-operation 
ties with the Agency, whose work it greatly appreciated. 
40. Although the process of restructuring had had an effect on the regular implementation of 
certain scientific and technical activities, Colombia had nevertheless recently upgraded its 
research reactor, replacing the fuel with a less enriched fuel in order to reduce the radiation 
risk; the reactor would be used for teaching purposes and basic research only. It should be 
noted that Colombia did not mine radioactive ore and did not therefore manufacture nuclear 
fuel. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 10 


41. Colombia imported radioisotopes since it was unable to produce them owing to the 
limited flux of its reactor. An inventory was currently being taken of the radioisotopes used 
and the facilities licensed to use them. In the medical field, the radium needles used in 
brachytherapy had been replaced by safer equipment involving caesium-137 sources. 
42. With regard to radiation protection and nuclear safety, an interim storage facility for 
spent sources had been constructed with Agency assistance at the premises of the INEA in 
Santafe de Bogota. Radiation protection and nuclear safety were of the utmost concern to the 
Colombian authorities, which intended to establish, in the near future, an efficient and 
independent regulatory system, as well as a unified radiation monitoring system. 
Furthermore, through INGEMINAS, Colombia was participating in the world nuclear test 
monitoring programme; with Canadian assistance, it had established a broad band 
seismological station at El Rosal, which complemented the Colombian seismic monitoring 
network. 
43. The Agency's prime objective continued to be to accelerate and enlarge the contribution 
of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world, an objective it achieved 
by providing developing Member States with effective assistance in the area of the peaceful 
uses of nuclear energy. Colombia was therefore pleased to note that the ARCAL agreement 
would be signed by the countries of the region during the present session of the General 
Conference; after fruitful negotiations, they had managed to draft a binding agreement which, 
with the co-operation of the Agency, would make it possible to strengthen further 
co-operation between the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean in the area of 
teaching, research and the development of nuclear science and techniques - that was a great 
success for horizontal co-operation. With regard to the TCF, he said that it should be 
strengthened through the provision of adequate resources. For its part, Colombia was making 
every effort to pay its contributions on time and it hoped that other countries would do the 
same. 
44. Like all countries striving for peace, Colombia was aware that that dream would only 
become a reality when there was general and complete disarmament. It could, therefore, only 
deplore, in the strongest possible terms, the conducting of nuclear tests of whatever type, since 
they jeopardized international peace and security and were a serious threat to the environment 
and human health. Colombia also regretted that the nuclear-weapon States had not taken 
sufficient steps to ensure the rapid elimination of all such weapons. Colombia, which was a 
party to the Tlatelolco Treaty and the NPT, and a signatory to the CTBT, was a strong 
advocate of the elimination of nuclear weapons and had urged the international community to 
begin negotiations immediately on nuclear disarmament. In its opinion, the responsibility for 
taking decisive measures to rid the world of the nuclear threat lay with the States that 
possessed such weapons. Those States should demonstrate their political will by supporting 
the establishment, within the framework of the Conference on Disarmament, of a special 
committee for nuclear disarmament negotiations. The only solution and the only way out of 
the current deadlock was the complete elimination of nuclear weapons. 
45. Mr. MICHAELIDES (Cyprus), having welcomed Benin as a new member of the 
Agency, recalled that the previous year Cyprus had encouraged all Member States of the 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 11 


Agency to co-operate more closely and to help the Agency to enhance its activities and its role 
so that mankind would continue to benefit from its work in the future. 

46. Over the previous year, Cyprus had worked towards that goal: it had created a suitable 
infrastructure and an operational legal framework to combat illicit trafficking in nuclear and 
other radioactive materials, and had ratified the Convention on the Physical Protection of 
Nuclear Material. The Council of Ministers had recently approved the ratification of the 
Convention on Nuclear Safety, and the ratification process was expected to be completed by 
the end of the year. Furthermore, it had also approved the ratification of the additional 
protocol to the safeguards agreement, and he hoped that, with the Agency's assistance, that 
ratification process would also be completed by the end of the year. 
47. One even more important step was the decision of the Council of Ministers to establish 
the Cyprus Atomic Energy Committee. In the near future, with the Agency's assistance, the 
necessary legislation would be adopted and the competent authorities and required 
infrastructure would be established to ensure that the people of Cyprus were protected against 
the harmful effects of ionizing radiation and that Cyprus was meeting its international 
commitments. 
48. In order to strengthen further its co-operation with the Agency's Member States, and to 
demonstrate its strong commitment to combatting proliferation and illicit trafficking in 
nuclear-weapon materials and nuclear-related dual-purpose items and technologies, Cyprus 
had recently applied to become a member of the Nuclear Suppliers Group. Furthermore, it 
had signed the CTBT and was modifying its legislation with a view to ratifying that Treaty. 
49. Eager to ensure a peaceful future for mankind, Cyprus had contributed as far as possible 
to strengthening international security and the safeguards system. Further steps could be taken 
to establish peace in the world through international co-operation and mutual understanding. 
50. In conclusion, he fully supported the Director General's initiatives and noted that 
Cypriot experts had derived great benefit from their participation in national and regional 
technical co-operation projects, and in various courses, seminars, workshops and conferences 
organized during the year by the Agency. 
51. Mr. UMER (Nigeria), having welcomed the admission of Benin to the Agency, 
noted with satisfaction the Agency's achievements in 1997 in various sectors of its activities 
and the important measures introduced in the management of technical co-operation, 
especially the incorporation of projects in the national development objectives of Member 
States. He welcomed the fact that the new strategy, involving closer collaboration right from 
the project conception stage, was being implemented on an increasingly wide scale. He also 
commended the research and technology transfer programmes that had made a positive 
contribution to sustainable soil and water management, animal production and health, food 
irradiation techniques and plant breeding using mutation techniques. The encouraging results 
of the studies conducted in Nigeria on the value of nitrogen-fixing plants for rehabilitating and 
maintaining the fertility of tropical soils was generating increasing interest in the country and 
he would welcome the Agency's continued assistance in that area. He also commended the 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 12 


Model Project concept, which was being pursued on a wide geographical basis, and 
mentioned in particular the water resources management project in which Nigeria was actively 
participating. 


52. Nigeria, which continued to attach high priority to the technical co-operation 
programme, was very concerned at the unexpected decline in contributions to the TCF. 
Notwithstanding the conclusions of the Informal Working Group on the Financing of 
Technical Assistance, he believed that, in order to ensure the effective implementation of that 
important part of the Agency's activities, all Member States should renew their commitment 
to pay their contributions in full and on time. As a gesture of its commitment to the technical 
co-operation programme, the Nigerian Government was pledging a contribution of $50 000 to 
the TCF for 1999. 
53. In September 1988, representatives of African Member States had met during the 
thirty-second regular session of the General Conference to consider ways of intensifying 
regional co-operation in the use of nuclear techniques for development. That had given rise to 
AFRA, which in ten years had proved to be an important framework for the exchange of 
information and experience among African scientists and technicians in the field of nuclear 
science and technology. As a founding member of AFRA, Nigeria played an active role in all 
its programme activities, and Nigerian scientists were participating in ten AFRA projects. 
Nigeria had also hosted two AFRA training workshops at the Centre for Energy Research and 
Training in Zaria, one on the evaluation of the hazards associated with waste with an 
enhanced concentration of naturally occurring radionuclides, and the other to formulate 
guidelines for the management of waste from medical applications and consumer products. In 
that connection, he expressed Nigeria's appreciation to the Agency for its regular support to 
AFRA, and to the United States, France, the UNDP, OPEC and all those that had contributed 
to AFRA's success. Nigeria continued to seek funds from other developed countries to 
enhance AFRA's activities. 
54. Nigeria's determination to use nuclear energy for peaceful and for research purposes 
was demonstrated by its miniature neutron source reactor project. The project was 
progressing well with the completion of approximately 90% of the infrastructure, while the 
reactor itself had already been dispatched by the Chinese manufacturers. He thanked the 
Agency once more for its assistance with that project. 
55. Nigeria attached great importance to nuclear safety and welcomed the preparations for 
the implementation of the Convention on Nuclear Safety. It also supported international 
efforts in the areas of nuclear safety, radioactive waste management and radiation protection, 
and welcomed the positive measures outlined in that connection by the Secretariat. 
56. Nigeria had observed with concern the prolonged negotiations on the amendment of 
Article VI of the Statute. The call for amendment was motivated by the serious 
under-representation of developing Member States on the Board of Governors. He therefore 
urged all the parties concerned to demonstrate a spirit of compromise in the coming 
negotiations. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 13 


57. Ms. PADILLA TERCERO (Nicaragua) hailed the election of a Mexican woman 
as President of the General Conference as an honour for all the women of Latin America and 
welcomed Benin's admission to the Agency. 
58. The Department of Technical Co-operation was to be commended on having 
strengthened its efficiency and effectiveness in recent years. The technical co-operation given 
to Nicaragua in conjunction with national projects had been instrumental in solving some of 
the country's urgent problems. In the area of health, the Agency had given considerable 
support for the establishment of the National Radiotherapy Institute, which was of great 
benefit to the economically deprived sectors of the population and, in the area of the 
environment, it had also provided support for the cleaning up of Lake Managua and the 
development of geothermal resources, providing solutions to socio-economic and ecological 
problems. 
59. She appealed to the generosity of the donor countries to provide extrabudgetary support 
for the continuation of the Agency's technical co-operation programmes in Nicaragua in 
the 1999-2000 cycle. The radiotherapy unit provided with the help of the Norwegian 
Government and the Agency was not sufficient to cope with the increasing number of patients. 
Nicaragua did not have the necessary resources to purchase a second unit, which was 
nevertheless needed. It was also essential to start to develop nuclear medicine, which did not 
yet exist in Nicaragua and which was only available to a few people who had the means to be 
treated abroad. Nicaragua also needed to have a research reactor to promote the country's 
scientific development. Nicaragua had paid its contributions to the TCF for 1997 and 1998 
and to the Regular Budget and hoped that that major effort would encourage the donor 
countries to meet their commitments to the developing countries in full. 
60. Poverty, the enemy of progress, could only be fought on a common front. Nicaragua 
welcomed the Board's approval of the intergovernmental ARCAL agreement, under which the 
States Parties would devote themselves to using nuclear energy for peaceful purposes and to 
defending their mutual interests with respect to development. The Nicaraguan Government 
had decided to sign that agreement. Nevertheless, mechanisms would have to be established 
to promote co-operation between ARCAL States Parties, regardless of their size, so that the 
least developed among them could receive the assistance which they needed. 
61. Mr. BULBULA (Ethiopia), having welcomed Benin, thanked the Agency for its 
efforts in transferring nuclear technology for peaceful purposes. Among the Agency's 
activities of global significance was the establishment in Africa of a nuclear-weapon-free 
zone, which ensured the safety of the African continent from nuclear threats. 
62. The Ethiopian Government, through the Ethiopian Science and Technology 
Commission, was in the process of establishing the necessary capacity for implementing 
programmes and projects of socio-economic relevance. It was confident that its partnership 
with the Agency would bear fruit. 
63. Ethiopia co-operated with the Agency in the eradication of livestock diseases such as 
trypanosomiasis using the sterile insect technique, in isotope hydrology and in the 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 14 


development and management of groundwater and geothermal resources. Those activities 
were backed up by the training of human resources in nuclear technology and physics. 
Ethiopia was grateful to the donors which had been able to complement their support by 
providing cost-free experts. 

64. Ethiopia also benefited from the Agency's programme in the field of nutrition and 
participated in regional programmes, particularly through AFRA, and Model Projects. The 
technical working group meetings of AFRA were useful both for the technical management of 
the programme and for the consideration of issues related to African development. The 
technical co-operation network developed through TCDC was taking root. 
65. Ethiopia's institutional approach, together with the Agency's willingness to be an 
effective and solid partner in the country's development efforts, provided an opportunity 
which Ethiopia wished to foster. The Country Programme Framework, complemented by 
short-term, medium-term and long-term plans, would enhance the partnership between the 
Agency and Ethiopia for technical co-operation purposes. Areas of opportunity would be 
clearly identified in terms of their relevance. 
66. In April 1998, the Ethiopian Science and Technology Commission had published a 
special bulletin on the occasion of the Agency's fortieth anniversary, highlighting its 
co-operation achievements and future projects. Also in April, Ethiopia had hosted the ninth 
technical working group meeting of AFRA in Addis Ababa, headquarters of the Organization 
of African Unity and of the United Nations Economic Commission for Africa. 
67. Mr. HEZZAH (League of Arab States) said that the League, which had a 
co-operation agreement with the Agency, wished to strengthen that co-operation. The visit to 
the Agency by the League's Secretary-General in July 1998 and his discussion at that time 
with the Agency's Director General would undoubtedly open up new prospects for 
co-operation between the two organizations. It was to be hoped that the Agency would 
strengthen its role in the area of the peaceful uses of nuclear energy by establishing a balance 
between its safeguards and nuclear safety activities and its technical co-operation activities. 
The League would make every effort to rid the Middle East region of weapons of mass 
destruction, including nuclear weapons. It should be recalled that all Member States of the 
League had acceded to the NPT and had submitted their nuclear facilities to comprehensive 
safeguards. The international community was called upon to invite Israel to accede to 
the NPT without delay and to submit all its nuclear facilities to comprehensive Agency 
safeguards as a necessary step towards the establishment of the Middle East as a 
nuclear-weapon-free zone, which would permit the consolidation of peace and security in the 
region. The Director General was therefore urged to intensify his contacts with the countries 
of the region with a view to accelerating that process. 
68. Mr. ROMAN-MOREY (Agency for the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons in Latin 
America and the Caribbean) welcomed the election of a woman representing a Latin 
American country as President of the General Conference. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 15 


69. As was well known, the Tlatelolco Treaty had been the first international instrument to 
establish a nuclear-weapon-free zone in a densely populated region of the planet. More than 
three decades after its adoption, that Treaty, to which all the countries of the region had 
acceded, had become a model for the world's other nuclear-weapon-free zones, which 
constituted the backbone of the international nuclear non-proliferation regime. The Tlatelolco 
Treaty established, both in its spirit and in its letter, the inalienable right of States to use 
nuclear energy for exclusively peaceful purposes for their socio-economic development and 
provided for the application of the necessary international safeguards by the Agency. 
70. During the past year, OP ANAL had had to take a clear and firm stand in response to the 
severe blow suffered by the global efforts to eliminate nuclear weapons as a result of the 
nuclear tests carried out by India and Pakistan. The countries of Latin America and the 
Caribbean earnestly hoped that those tests would be the last to be witnessed by mankind. In 
that connection, Pakistan's intention to sign the CTBT in the near future was comforting 
news. 
71. Another matter of considerable concern to OPANAL was the transport of radioactive 
materials in the zone of application of the Tlatelolco Treaty. There were major international 
shipping routes in that zone, notably the Caribbean Sea, the Panama Canal and the Straits of 
Magellan. The General Conference of OPANAL and the Agency's Board of Governors had 
frequently expressed their views on that subject. It was to be hoped that at the present session 
of the Agency's General Conference, new and more comprehensive safety measures would be 
proposed and, where appropriate, approved - in particular, measures for the protection and 
safety of those States along whose coasts increasingly dangerous nuclear cargoes were carried. 
The Tlatelolco Treaty did not cover such matters, and the countries of the region, which had 
always demonstrated the greatest respect for international law, depended on international 
bodies to protect the interests of the coastal populations concerned. 
72. With regard to nuclear disarmament, although the Latin American and Caribbean region 
had established a nuclear-weapon-free zone, its efforts did not stop there, and it was 
campaigning for the establishment of new nuclear-weapon-free zones in other populated 
regions of the planet. It should be recalled that no less than 110 countries had put those 
principles into practice through the Tlatelolco Treaty in Latin America, the Rarotonga Treaty 
in the South Pacific, the Bangkok Treaty in South East Asia and the Pelindaba Treaty in 
Africa. It was to be hoped that the nuclear Powers, which had made specific commitments 
through the Additional Protocols to the Tlatelolco Treaty, would apply themselves with 
greater vigour and transparency to eliminating nuclear weapons. 

GC(42)/OR.8 
page 16 


73. The Tlatelolco Treaty had been signed by all the countries of the region and the 
principle of universality was for them particularly important. It was OP ANAL's earnest hope 
therefore that, as in the past, the Agency would encourage international events at the regional 
level to promote universal respect for its requirements in the areas of safeguards and nuclear 
safety through additional protocols. Other States of the region that were not yet members of 
the Agency might also be encouraged to profit from the benefits it offered and be ready to 
assume the concomitant obligations. There were many areas in which the Agency and 
OPANAL could co-operate and OPANAL, for its part, was, as always, ready to respond to or 
to propose initiatives. 
The meeting rose at 4.40 p.m. 


GC(42)/OR.9 


30 October 1998 
GENERAL Distr. 


International Atomic Energy Agency 

GENERAL CONFERENCE Original: ENGLISH 


FORTY-SECOND (1998) REGULAR SESSION 

RECORD OF THE NINTH PLENARY MEETING 


Held at the Austria Center Vienna 
on Friday, 25 September 1998, at 10.30 a.m. 


President: Ms. LAJOUS VARGAS (Mexico) 


CONTENTS 
Item of the 
agenda* Paragraphs 


8 Election of Members to the Board of Governors (resumed) 1 - 5 

18 Implementation of the agreement between the Agency and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea for the application of 
safeguards in connection with the Treaty on the 
Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons 6-29 

19 Implementation of United Nations Security Council resolutions 
relating to Iraq 30-70 

[*] GC(42)/20. 

The composition of delegations attending the session is given in document GC(42)/INF/13/Rev.3. 
98-03490 (XXXVIII) 

For reasons of economy, this document has been printed in a limited number. 
Delegates are kindly requested to bring their own copies of documents to meetings. 



GC(42)/OR.9 
page 2 


Abbreviations used in this record 
Agreed Framework 
Agreed Framework between the United States of America and the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
DPRK 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea 
FFCD 
full, final and complete declaration 
KEDO 
Korean Peninsula Energy Development Organization 
UNSCOM 
United Nations Special Commission 



GC(42)/OR.9 
page 3 


ELECTION OF MEMBERS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS (resumed) 


1. The PRESIDENT invited the representative of India to report on the progress of 
the consultations within the Middle East and South Asia Group. 
2. Mr. TIWARI (India) said that he had been informed that, as a result of the 
consultations, Syria had agreed to withdraw from the elections leaving only Jordan to fill the 
so-called "floating seat". Consequently, no elections would be required. 

3. The PRESIDENT said that she was pleased that agreement had been reached, and 
she therefore took it that the General Conference wished to elect Jordan, from the area of the 
Middle East and South Asia, to fill the so-called "floating seat". 
4. Jordan was duly elected. 
5. Mr. TWAL (Jordan) thanked the representative of India for the role he had played 
in the consultations, and Kuwait, Sri Lanka, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Syria for 
withdrawing their candidatures for the seat in a spirit of solidarity. He also expressed his 
gratitude to all those delegations which had supported Jordan's candidature for the 
membership of similar bodies in other organizations, and assured them that they could count 
on Jordan's support in return. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE AGREEMENT BETWEEN THE AGENCY AND THE 
DEMOCRATIC PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF KOREA FOR THE APPLICATION OF 
SAFEGUARDS IN CONNECTION WITH THE TREATY ON THE NONPROLIFERATION 
OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS 
(GC(42)/16,GC(42)/30) 

6. The PRESIDENT noted that the current item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(41)/RES/22. Since that resolution had been adopted, the Director 
General had reported periodically to the Board on the implementation of safeguards in the 
DPRK. He had also submitted document GC(42)/16 to the Conference summarizing the 
developments of the past year. In addition, a draft resolution had been submitted by a number 
of States which was contained in document GC(42)/30, to which two addenda with additional 
co-sponsors had been issued. 
7. Mr. MORGAN (Canada), introducing the draft resolution, said the fact that it had 
attracted such a large number of sponsors was an indication of the wish of the Agency and its 
members to ensure that the non-proliferation regime in the DPRK was implemented. Since 
the adoption of resolution GC(41)/RES/22, there had been a number of disturbing 
developments in the DPRK and the text of that earlier resolution had been modified to express 
concern at those developments. 
8. Mr. Ki-Moon BAN (Republic of Korea) said that, for the past three years, the 
General Conference had adopted resolutions expressing concern over the continuing noncompliance 
of the DPRK with its safeguards agreement. It had also urged the DPRK to 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 4 


co-operate fully with the Agency and, in the meantime, to take all necessary steps to preserve 
information about the past history of its nuclear activities. Regrettably, as was clear from the 
Director General's report in document GC(42)/16, no progress had been made on most of the 
fundamental issues involved owing to lack of co-operation. 

9. It was deplorable that, despite a series of consultations with the Agency, the DPRK 
continued to maintain its irresponsible and unco-operative attitude in violation of its 
safeguards agreement. Its persistent non-compliance was a serious challenge not only to the 
Agency's safeguards system as a whole but also to the basic framework of the NPT, and it 
could eventually undermine the Agency's authority as the foremost international defence 
against nuclear proliferation. It was essential that the international community take a strong 
stand on the matter. 
10. The fact that 57 countries had sponsored the draft resolution clearly demonstrated the 
international community's desire to see the issue resolved as soon as possible. It also 
reflected the determination of the General Conference to see that the DPRK fulfilled its 
obligations under its safeguards agreement. He hoped the draft resolution could be adopted by 
consensus. 
11. Mr. RITCH (United States of America) said that his country continued to support 
the Agency's efforts to implement safeguards in the DPRK and monitor the freeze on its 
nuclear facilities pursuant to the Agreed Framework. 
12. For almost four years the Agreed Framework had shown itself to be an important 
mechanism for ensuring peace and stability on the Korean Peninsula. Under it, the DPRK's 
graphite-moderated reactors and related facilities had been frozen and Agency inspectors had 
maintained a continuous presence in the country to monitor the freeze. 
13. A joint US/DPRK team had essentially completed the canning and safe storage of some 
8000 spent nuclear fuel rods and, in that connection, he welcomed the DPRK's recent offer to 
proceed with the completion of the clean-up activities. The country had also co-operated with 
the Agency by allowing it to monitor ongoing maintenance activities in the radiochemical 
laboratory, and he urged it to continue that co-operation. 
14. Preparatory work on the two light-water reactors to be built by KEDO was continuing. 
The United States remained fully committed to the Agreed Framework, would continue to 
fulfil its obligations under it, and expected the DPRK to do likewise. 
15. He called on the DPRK to take all steps deemed necessary by the Agency to monitor the 
freeze and, at the appropriate time, verify its initial declarations. It should take no action 
which could be perceived as undermining its commitment to the Agreed Framework. 
Although it would be several years before key reactor components could be delivered, steps 
should be taken now to preserve essential information which was crucial to the verification of 
the initial declaration and to the successful implementation of the Agreed Framework. 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 5 


16. Lastly, he commended the Agency for the part it had played in implementing the Agreed 
Framework under the continuing mandate of the United Nations Security Council. 
17. Mr. YAMANAKA (Japan) thanked the representative of Canada for introducing 
the draft resolution and the Director General for his report. The DPRK's safeguards 
agreement remained in force and binding and he commended the Agency's efforts to 
implement safeguards measures and to monitor the freeze, as requested by the Security 
Council. However, it was regrettable that there had been no progress since the preceding 
session of the General Conference. 
18. Urgent steps needed to be taken to preserve the information required to verify the 
correctness and completeness of the DPRK's initial declaration, and he emphasized the 
importance of continuing to monitor the freeze pursuant to the Agreed Framework. He also 
called upon the DPRK to co-operate fully with the Agency and to facilitate its efforts. 
19. In conclusion, he appealed to all delegations to support the draft resolution. 
20. Mr. BIGGS (Australia) said that Australia was co-sponsoring the resolution 
because it believed the situation in the DPRK was still one of the most serious challenges to 
the international safeguards system. Since the DPRK's safeguards agreement with the Agency 
remained in force, that country should resume co-operation with Agency safeguards inspectors 
without delay and, in the meantime, it should do nothing that would prevent eventual 
verification of its initial declaration. He joined earlier speakers in commending the Agency 
for the role it had played in implementing the Agreed Framework. 
21. Mr. MORTON (New Zealand) said that the DPRK's non-compliance with its 
legal obligations was of the utmost concern to his country, and he noted with regret the 
comments in the Director General's report to the effect that a fundamental difference of 
opinion remained between the Agency and the DPRK regarding the current status of the 
latter's safeguards agreement. New Zealand fully shared the Agency's view that that 
agreement remained binding and in force, and that the DPRK was in breach of its obligations. 
22. New Zealand supported the Agreed Framework and was a participant in KEDO, which 
it saw as a means of resolving nuclear issues on the Korean Peninsula and advancing 
non-proliferation. KEDO was an ambitious project, and he was concerned that recent 
provocative acts by the DPRK could diminish support for it. He therefore urged the DPRK to 
take a more responsible approach to issues of regional security by co-operating with the 
Agency and meeting its safeguards commitments. 
23. Mr. ZHANG Yishan (China) requested that a vote be taken on the draft resolution. 
24. The PRESIDENT invited the Conference to vote by a show of hands on the draft 
resolution contained in document GC(42)/30. 
25. There were 49 votes in favour and none against, with 8 abstentions. The draft resolution 
was adopted. 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 6 


26. Mr. OTHMAN (Syrian Arab Republic) said his delegation had abstained because 
it considered that the DPRK had taken positive steps towards solving its problems with the 
Agency by freezing its nuclear activities and agreeing to international monitoring and 
inspection. He believed that the door should be left open for negotiations so that positive 
results could eventually be achieved. 
27. Mr. ZHANG Yishan (China) said his country had always held the view that 
denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula was essential if peace and stability in the region 
were to be achieved. However, for historical reasons, the problem was a complex one which 
China believed could only be solved by dialogue and negotiation between the parties 
concerned. It was for that reason that it had abstained from voting. 
28. Mr. Ki-Moon BAN (Republic of Korea) thanked all the sponsors for the support 
they had given the resolution just adopted, but noted that only 49 delegations had voted in 
favour of the resolution. He asked whether it would be in accordance with the Rules of 
Procedure of the General Conference for delegations of countries which had not been present 
in the room during the vote to write to the Secretariat expressing their support for the draft 
resolution. 
29. The PRESIDENT said that there would be no objection to that procedure. 
IMPLEMENTATION OF UNITED NATIONS SECURITY COUNCIL RESOLUTIONS 
RELATING TO IRAQ 
(GC(42)/14, GC(42)/29) 

30. The PRESIDENT said that the current item had been included in the agenda 
pursuant to resolution GC(41)/RES/23 adopted by the General Conference in 1997, 
paragraph 8 of which requested the Director General to report to the current session on his 
efforts to implement Security Council resolutions 687, 707, 715 and 1051 relating to Iraq. 
That report was contained in document GC(42)/14 and it had been discussed by the Board 
immediately before the Conference. A draft resolution had also been submitted which was 
contained in document GC(42)/29. 
31. Mr. KEMPEL (Austria), introducing the draft resolution, said that it recalled the 
developments which had taken place in Iraq since the preceding General Conference, 
commended the Director General and his Action Team for their efforts to fulfil their mandate 
under the relevant Security Council resolutions, condemned Iraq's decision of 
5 August 1998 to suspend co-operation with the Agency which was an unacceptable 
contravention of its obligations under the relevant Security Council resolutions and the 
Memorandum of Understanding, and called on Iraq to rescind that decision, to co-operate 
fully with the Agency in accordance with its obligations, and to resume dialogue immediately. 
32. The sponsors commended the draft resolution to the General Conference for adoption. 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 7 


33. Ms. KENNEDY (United States of America) applauded the Agency's continued 
efforts to uncover Iraq's nuclear programme and improve ongoing monitoring and verification 
in Iraq. 
34. Iraq had sought once again to challenge the will of the United Nations Security Council 
by ceasing co-operation with UNSCOM and the Agency. The Security Council had stated 
that Iraq's decision was unacceptable, and had taken note of the Director General's concern 
that Iraq's decision to cease co-operation significantly reduced the Agency's ability to ensure 
that Iraq was not conducting activities contrary to Security Council resolution 687. 
35. In May 1998, the Security Council had promulgated an important precondition, namely 
that once the Agency was satisfied that Iraq had addressed the few remaining questions and 
concerns, including fulfilling the requirement to adopt legal measures to prohibit activity 
contrary to Security Council resolution 687, it would then be prepared to endorse a change to 
long-term monitoring. The United States had supported that statement which had laid out a 
clear path for Iraq to follow in order to demonstrate progress. Since May, however, Iraq had 
taken two steps backwards by failing to address the Agency's questions and by ceasing 
co-operation with UNSCOM and the Agency. Iraq had to understand that there would be no 
relief from sanctions until it complied with its obligations under the relevant Security Council 
resolutions. 
36. The United States would continue to support the Agency's Action Team in Iraq, and 
work to help improve its ongoing monitoring and verification activities. That effort was 
critical to international peace and stability and she strongly encouraged other Member States to 
assist with it. A robust, long-term Agency verification regime was the key to ensuring that 
Iraq did not reconstitute its nuclear weapons programme. 
37. Mr. AL-JANABI (Iraq) said that the Agency had carried out its mandate under 
Security Council resolution 687 and Iraq, for its part, had made great efforts to implement 
paragraphs 12 and 13 of that resolution by applying all provisions and complying with all the 
Agency's requests. In his reports to the Security Council in October 1997 and April 1998, the 
Director General had stated that the Agency's activities relating to Iraq's nuclear programme 
had reached their apogee. Moreover, the Agency had reported that there were no signs or 
symptoms in Iraq to suggest that any nuclear activity was being pursued, and had stated that 
Iraq had fulfilled all its commitments in respect of the nuclear programme registered with the 
Agency in the course of its monitoring activities. 
38. In the light of those facts, it was distressing that the draft resolution which had been 
submitted should so misrepresent the situation. The preambular part made no mention of 
what had been achieved, while operative paragraph 2, in particular, would impede 
development and posed a threat to the implementation of Security Council resolutions and to 
the solution of the problems in the region. Continuous monitoring had been under way in Iraq 
for many months: there had been 26 visits in September alone, followed by 19 monitoring 
exercises. Iraq had never refused ongoing monitoring, as it had made clear to the Agency. 
Furthermore, the Agency's reports had never mentioned any violation by Iraq of Security 
Council resolutions. 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 8 


39. A new initiative had recently been undertaken by the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations with a view to solving the problem and reviewing implementation of the Security 
Council resolutions in question. That initiative was currently being discussed in New York 
with Iraq's Deputy Prime Minister. The General Conference should give that new initiative a 
chance to yield positive results. He accordingly proposed that operative paragraph 2 of the 
draft resolution, which condemned Iraq, and operative paragraph 3, which was not clear, 
should be deleted; and he called on all countries to abstain from voting. 
40. Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) said that, although he found the main thrust 
of the draft resolution acceptable, it failed to take account of the many positive aspects of the 
Director General's well-balanced report to the Security Council or to the General Conference. 
His delegation had therefore proposed a number of amendments aimed at making the draft 
resolution more balanced and a more objective reflection of the real state of affairs in Iraq. 
Thus, bearing in mind that the operative paragraphs of the draft resolution were based on 
Security Council resolution 1194, it had proposed that a new paragraph should be included 
stating that Iraq had not achieved its objective of creating nuclear weapons, and that there was 
no evidence that it had maintained the potential for manufacturing its own nuclear or fissile 
material for military purposes in quantities of practical significance. Furthermore, it had 
proposed that operative paragraph 5 of the draft resolution should be deleted, since it had 
doubts regarding a continuing investigation of Iraq's nuclear programme. 
41. Unfortunately, those proposals had not been taken into account and, consequently, the 
Russian Federation could not support the draft resolution. 
42. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said that the delegation of Iraq had cited those parts of 
the Director General's report which it considered to be in its country's favour. However, any 
instances of co-operation by Iraq with the Agency should not be seen as a favour to the 
international community but as the simple fulfilment of its obligations, and there were still 
many outstanding issues which Iraq had failed to address. A number of questions relating to 
Iraq's "Full, Final and Complete Declaration" (FFCD) remained unresolved, for instance, as 
had been pointed out in the Agency's July 1998 status report (GOV/INF/1998/16) and in the 
Director General's report to the General Conference. Moreover, following upon the adoption 
of Security Council resolution 687 in 1991, Iraq had been expected to adopt national 
legislation prohibiting its citizens from engaging in the activities proscribed by that resolution 
within 30 days of its acceptance of it. Although Iraq had accepted the resolution in 1993, it 
had yet to enact any legislation, despite repeated promises that it would do so by 
October 1998. It had also failed to identify the foreign national allegedly involved in an offer 
of assistance to its clandestine nuclear programme, and had not provided documentary 
evidence to the Agency of the existence of the so-called "high government committee". 
Moreover, the Agency's progress report of October 1997 (GOV/INF/827) highlighted Iraq's 
minimalist response to Agency questioning and its strategy of concealment. 
43. The climax of Iraq's actions was its decision on 5 August to suspend co-operation with 
the Agency, though the delegation of Iraq claimed that co-operation had not been suspended 
and had referred to continuing ongoing monitoring and verification activities (OMV). The 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 9 


Agency had described Iraq's decision as a contravention of its obligations under the relevant 
Security Council resolutions and the Memorandum of Understanding of May 1998. 


44. Finally, he noted that the draft resolution which had been submitted used language taken 
from Security Council resolution 1194 which condemned Iraq's decision. Thus, it was not 
exaggerated. 
45. Mr. EL-FEKI (Egypt) said that, although his delegation intended to vote in favour 
of the draft resolution, some of the wording used in it left much to be desired and, in 
particular, it did not take account of Iraq's co-operation with United Nations missions. The 
international community should be working towards reconciliation with Iraq rather than 
promoting continued discord, and should be attempting to find a solution which would 
alleviate the suffering of its people. 
46. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) appealed to the Conference to take a more 
balanced view of the situation regarding Iraq. The Director General's report did contain some 
very positive statements as well. For instance, paragraph 25 stated that there were no 
indications of significant discrepancies between the technically coherent picture which had 
evolved of Iraq's clandestine nuclear programme and the information contained in the 
consolidated version of the FFCD; paragraph 26 noted that the summary of technical 
achievements had been judged to be consistent with the technically coherent picture of the 
programme; and paragraph 27 said that there were no indications of Iraq having retained any 
physical capability for the indigenous production of weapon-usable nuclear material in 
amounts of any practical significance. On the other hand, as paragraph 28 pointed out, a 
considerable intellectual resource remained in the form of the staff who had been employed in 
Iraq's nuclear programme. That could not be eliminated, but it could be used for peaceful 
purposes. Lastly, as paragraph 29 made clear, it was impossible to provide absolute assurance 
in such matters. 
47. Iraq had been subjected to 1500 inspections since 1994, probably more than any other 
country at any time in history. He asked whether, against that background, the General 
Conference again wished to condemn Iraq and whether a more positive approach would not 
achieve the desired result in a far shorter time. Moreover, it would be particularly unfortunate 
if fewer votes were cast in favour of the draft resolution than would constitute a simple 
majority of the Agency's membership, as had just occurred in another case. 
48. He therefore proposed either that operative paragraph 2 should be transferred to the 
preambular part of the draft resolution and placed after paragraph (f), substituting the word 
"condemns" with the word "deploring", or that the paragraph should remain in its present 
place but be amended to read: 
"appeals to Iraq to renew immediately its co-operation suspended on 5 August 1998 
with the IAEA in conformity with its obligations under the relevant Security Council 
resolutions ..." 


GC(42)/OR.9 
page 10 


By refraining from hostility and further humiliation of Iraq, the text would promote peace 
between Iraq and Kuwait and in the Middle East in general. It was also important to bear in 
mind that the United Nations Secretary-General was currently working on a solution which 
might ultimately result in the lifting of sanctions and end the suffering of the Iraqi people. 

49. Mr. AL-GHAIS (Kuwait) said that both Morocco and Egypt were aware that the 
suffering of the Iraqi people was not the fault of the international community, including 
Kuwait, which, on the contrary, was trying to solve the problem. That situation was due 
entirely to the decision of the Iraqi Government. Furthermore, the problem of the restoration 
of peace and security in the region was not a matter which concerned only Iraq and Kuwait but 
the whole international community. 
50. Mr. KEMPEL (Austria) said that the original text of the draft resolution had been 
sponsored by a large number of countries which had been unable to accept the amendments 
proposed either during earlier consultations or from the floor. In order to enable the 
Conference to move forward in its business, he requested a roll-call vote on the text as it 
stood. 
51. The PRESIDENT, noting the request of the representative of Austria for a roll-call 
vote, asked the representatives of Iraq and Morocco whether they wished to request a vote on 
the amendments they had proposed. 
52. Mr. FARIS (Iraq) thanked the representative of Morocco for his comments and the 
understanding he had shown for the difficulties and suffering of the Iraqi people. He fully 
shared his views and endorsed the proposal he had made. He also hoped that the General 
Conference would take full account of the points which had been raised, and the efforts which 
were under way in New York with a view to resolving the current problems. 
53. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that the situation was a complex one and 
relations between Iraq and the Security Council were difficult, but the General Conference 
was not the proper place to discuss such matters. Throughout his diplomatic career he had 
never requested a vote on an issue because he had always sought to reach decisions by 
consensus. The level of difference between the two positions was small and an attempt 
should be made to resolve it through further consultations. He therefore did not wish to 
request a vote on the amendment he had put forward. 
54. He appealed to the Conference to take a sensible, constructive and co-operative 
approach with a view to encouraging a resumption of co-operation between Iraq and 
UNSCOM. If the matter was put to the vote, there would be many explanations of votes 
following the decision, which would take up a lot of time; and the message the Conference 
would be giving to the world would be less than clear. 
55. Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) said that, although his country could not 
endorse the actions which had led to the disagreement between Iraq and the Agency's 
inspectors, it did not feel that the draft resolution which had been submitted would help 
restore normal relations. Rather than further exacerbating the antagonism between Iraq and 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 11 


the Agency, the Conference should be trying to persuade Iraq that the Agency should be 
allowed to carry out its duties. He appealed to the sponsors of the draft resolution to look at 
the matter from a more positive standpoint. The proposal which had been put forward by the 
representative of Morocco was well founded and merited careful consideration. If the 
Conference were able to reach a consensus on it, it would mark a significant step forward. 


56. Mr. REGUIEG (Algeria) said that he also felt that every possibility of reaching a 
consensus should be explored. The principal objective was to restore co-operation between 
Iraq and the Agency. Instead of condemning Iraq, the Conference should urge it to resume its 
co-operation. The amendment proposed by the representative of Morocco could be most 
useful in reaching a consensus on the issue. He also associated himself with comments which 
had been made by the representative of the Russian Federation. 
57. The PRESIDENT asked the sponsors of the draft resolution whether they were 
prepared to engage in further consultations, as had been suggested by the representative of 
Morocco. 
58. Mr. KEMPEL (Austria) said that consultations had been held earlier and the 
sponsors had not been able to accept the language which had been proposed at that point. 
They were also not able to support the amendments which had been proposed during the 
current meeting. He therefore did not feel that further consultations would be useful and 
would prefer to proceed to a vote on the draft resolution. 
59. Mr. JOSEPH (Australia) said that, if the Conference was not voting on the 
proposed amendments to the resolution, it might not be necessary to vote on the resolution 
itself. He suggested that the draft resolution should be adopted by acclamation. 
60. Mr. BENMOUSSA (Morocco) said that, for a proposal to be adopted by 
acclamation, there had to be a consensus. He therefore could not support the suggestion of the 
representative of Australia. His delegation had no argument with the main thrust of the draft 
resolution, but it did disagree with the wording of one paragraph which made the text 
vindictive and unhelpful. If the international community wished to condemn Iraq, Morocco 
would not associate itself with that action. He was also shocked that the offer of consultations 
had been rejected. If the European Union insisted upon its implacable approach, his country 
would refuse to take part in the vote. 
61. Mr. FARIS (Iraq) said that he continued to feel that the General Conference 
should adopt a constructive approach to the problem and should not push Iraq into a corner 
which would make it even more difficult for it to co-operate with international organizations 
in the future. His country had hoped to be able to react positively to the new initiative of the 
Secretary-General of the United Nations. 
62. Adoption of the resolution by acclamation was clearly not feasible, and he associated 
himself with the comments which had been made by the representative of Morocco. 

GC(42)/OR.9 
page 12 


63. The PRESIDENT asked the General Conference whether it was prepared to 
approve the draft resolution contained in document GC(42)/29 without a vote. 
64. Mr. RYZHOV (Russian Federation) said that his country could not agree to that 
mode of procedure 
65. The PRESIDENT then invited the General Conference to proceed to a roll-call 
vote on the draft resolution contained in document GC(42)/29, as requested by the 
representative of Austria. 
66. Estonia, having been drawn by lot by the President, was called upon to vote first. 
67. The result of the vote was as follows: 
In favour:1 Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, 
Canada, Chile, Colombia, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, 
Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Holy See, Hungary, Israel, 
Italy, Japan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Latvia, Liechtenstein, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mexico, Monaco, Netherlands, New Zealand, 
Norway, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Saudi Arabia, 
Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, 
Thailand, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkey, 
Ukraine, United Arab Emirates, United Kingdom, United States of 
America, Uruguay, Venezuela. 

Abstaining: Afghanistan, Algeria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Burkina Faso, China, Cuba, 
Ghana, India, Indonesia, Islamic Republic of Iran, Jordan, Kenya, 
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Malaysia, Myanmar, Namibia, Pakistan, 
Russian Federation, South Africa, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Tunisia, Viet 
Nam, Zimbabwe. 

68. The draft resolution was adopted by 57 votes to zero, with 25 abstentions. 
69. Mr. FARIS (Iraq) said that his delegation found the adoption of the draft 
resolution regrettable. As a technical organization, the Agency should not allow itself to 
become a political forum where decisions were taken which in no way furthered its relations 
with his country. The resolution had no real solution to offer to the problems between Iraq 
and the Agency, and would not serve to promote transparency in his country's relations with 
the organization. 
70. In conclusion, he thanked all those countries which had abstained or had absented 
themselves for the purposes of the vote. 
The meeting rose at 1.25 p.m. 

Qatar later advised the Secretariat that, had it been present, it would have voted in favour. 


