
 
  
 
OPCW 
 
 
 Conference of the States Parties
 
Eleventh Session 
 C-11/DG.9 
 
5 – 8 December 2006 
 5 December 2006 
 
 
 Original: ENGLISH 
 
 
  
 


 
OPENING STATEMENT BY THE DIRECTOR-GENERAL 
TO THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 
AT ITS ELEVENTH SESSION 
 
 
Mr Chairman, 
Excellencies, 
Distinguished delegates, 
 
1. Allow me to welcome all of you most warmly to the Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties. 


 
2. I am delighted to see that, in appointing its new Chairman, the Conference has entrusted the stewardship of this Session to a distinguished Ambassador, who is also a friend: Alfonso Dastis of Spain.  Ambassador Dastis has considerable experience in OPCW matters, having, for instance, led the Executive Council.  This guarantees that the Organisation will once again have a consummate steward at its helm, who will help us to be productive and reach consensus. 


 
3. I would also like to thank our outgoing Chairman, who exceeded our high expectations.  Ambassador Arróspide’s achievements have allowed the OPCW to continue its successful exercise in multilateralism.  I am sure that we will see more of Ambassador Arróspide in the years to come, but for the moment we wish him every success back in Lima. 


 
4. This year has been productive for the OPCW.  We have started preparing for the Second Review Conference, which will take place in April 2008.  Much remains to be done on that front, and I will have more to say about that presently.  I will begin in the usual way, with a look at the highlights of this year’s events. 


 
Verification 
 
5. As we approach the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention, the extension of deadlines for the destruction of Category 1 chemical weapons remains a high-priority issue. 


 
6. At this Session, delegations will decide on a request by the United States of America for the establishment of a revised date for the final deadline for the destruction of all of its Category 1 chemical weapons, and on setting a specific date by which the Russian Federation must complete the destruction of its stockpiles of Category 1 chemical weapons. 

7. Both possessor States Parties are seeking the approval of the Conference for an extension of the deadline to the final, definitive date of April 2012 for the destruction of their entire Category 1 chemical weapons stockpile.  The Council is still considering the issue, and I trust it will reach agreement on this matter and recommend that the Conference approve the requests, which are in line with the Convention. 


 
8. In response to a request by a number of States Parties, and after some consultation, the Council is also considering a recommendation to organise visits to chemical weapons destruction facilities, or CWDFs, in the two major possessor States Parties. 


 
9. The reasons for such visits are clear and well supported.  I understand them to be a means of addressing political questions, in the context of the extension requests, about these States Parties’ destruction programmes. 


 
10. The Technical Secretariat will of course play the role the States Parties expect, pursuant to the recommendation.  At the same time I am confident that the visits this positive measure envisages will, as it must, remain separate from the inspections the Secretariat carries out under Articles IV and V of the Convention. 


 
11. Let me turn now to the progress that has been made in chemical disarmament.  Since the Tenth Session of the Conference, all possessor States Parties have made significant strides in destroying their stockpiles. 


 
12. As at 1 December 2006, 5 of these 6 possessor States had destroyed about 16,085 metric tonnes of Category 1 and 2 chemical weapons, or 22.5% of the total stockpiles declared.  Destruction operations in the 6th possessor State Party, Albania, are expected to begin before the end of the year. 


 
13. With the addition of a new CWDF in Maradykovsky in the Russian Federation in early August 2006, 14 CWDFs in 4 States Parties have been operational this year. 


 
14. In October 2006 Albania submitted a request for an extension of the interim destruction deadlines established by the Council, but it remains fully committed to destroying all of its Category 1 and 2 chemical weapons by 29 April 2007. 


 
15. The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya has submitted a request for the establishment of new interim and final deadlines for the destruction of all of its chemical weapons.  It plans to complete the destruction of its Category 1 chemical weapons by 31 December 2010, and of its Category 2 weapons by 31 December 2011. 


 
16. India and A State Party have each submitted a request for an extension of the 29 April 2007 final destruction deadline.  While India expects to have destroyed all of its chemical weapons by 28 April 2009, A State Party plans to have destroyed all of its Category 1 chemical weapons stockpiles by 31 December 2008.  These are two exemplary cases of compliance with and dedication to the Convention. 


 
17. China and Japan have jointly requested an extension to 2012 of the deadline for the destruction of the chemical weapons abandoned by Japan on the territory of China.  I wish to commend both States Parties for their continuing efforts in this area, and to confirm once more the readiness of the Secretariat to continue to support them. 


 
18. I would also express my appreciation for the concern demonstrated by Italy in addressing the issue of its old chemical weapons vis-à-vis the 2012 deadline.  This is a good example of this State Party’s deep sense of its responsibility to fulfil its Convention obligations. 


 
19. The verification efforts of the OPCW related to the prevention of any future proliferation of chemical weapons are also proceeding apace. 


 
20. At least 179 and, hopefully, all 180 industry inspections approved by the Conference at its Tenth Session will be completed by the end of the year, in accordance with the distribution by category stipulated in the Programme and Budget for 2006.  Sixteen Schedule 1, 45 Schedule 2, 26 Schedule 3, and 88 OCPF inspections have been completed, for a total of 175 industry inspections to date.  Of the remaining 5, at least 4 are either now being conducted or will be within the next two weeks: One OCPF inspection is, for the time being, pending.   


 
21. The limited introduction, in the third quarter of this year, of sampling and analysis for subsequent inspections of Schedule 2 plant sites has been a success.  The first two Article VI missions in which sampling and analysis were used have gone according to plan, thus demonstrating that our equipment and our procedures work well, and that the inspection teams are up to the tasks assigned to them. 


 
22. In both missions, the inspection teams enjoyed the full support of the inspected States Parties concerned.  This has helped us not only to complete each inspection within the time-frame specified by the Convention, but also to draw useful lessons for future inspections. 


 
23. The Secretariat plans to continue to meet this Convention requirement by dispatching a sampling-and-analysis team to between 8 and 10 Schedule 2 plant sites next year. 


 
24. In addition, and in accordance with the instructions received from States Parties, the Secretariat has continued to improve its readiness to conduct a challenge inspection should it be called on to do so.  This has been achieved through a series of exercises and the streamlining of internal operating procedures necessary for such an activity.  It is our intention to continue this work over the coming year, and to involve States Parties as much as possible.  


 
25. In the context of the consultations leading to the adoption of the Draft Programme and Budget for 2007, which was issued on 28 June last, States Parties have considered the Secretariat’s proposal to increase the number of inspections of other chemical production facilities, or OCPFs.  Article VI, paragraph 2, of the Convention recognises that OCPFs can produce scheduled chemicals.  The Secretariat’s informed technical view is that the number of inspections proposed for this category in the Draft Programme and Budget for 2007 is necessary in order to bring the verification effort to acceptable levels as soon as possible. 


 
26. It is worth recalling that the intrinsic risk here is increased by the large and growing number of such facilities declared annually by States Parties, by the general character of the information they submit on them under the Convention, and by the relatively low number of inspections that OCPFs are subject to.  I hope that delegations will work in a spirit of consensus to arrive at a balanced decision. 


 
27. I appeal to Member States to continue to support the objective risk assessment made by the Secretariat and, based on it, to approve more OCPF inspections.  In so doing they will further enhance the independence of the technical assessment, while allowing for a more adequate level of assurance that industrial activities are in compliance with the Convention. 


 
28. The 2007 Draft Programme and Budget also proposes fewer inspections of Schedule 1 and Schedule 2 facilities—a quantitative and not a qualitative reduction.  As the Verification Division explained during the facilitation on this matter, this proposal is in line with the Secretariat’s risk evaluation and the Convention.  In no way does it imply a diminution of the inspection effort in these key areas of industry verification. 


 
29. The decision States Parties take on the number of industry inspections in each category will help the Secretariat prepare future Draft Programmes and Budgets. 


 
National implementation 
 
30. The Secretariat has continued to help States Parties to meet their Article VII obligations. 


 
31. By 31 December 2006, the Secretariat will have satisfied 34 requests that States Parties have made this year for direct bilateral assistance in 37 States Parties.  Three workshops on the drafting of legislation will have been organised for States Parties in the Andean Community, the Caribbean, and West Africa.  The Secretariat will also have worked closely with the National Authorities of 114 States Parties in the preparation and review of 226 legislative drafts. 


 
32. Almost all States Parties have now established a National Authority and, in most of these, steps are being taken to adopt administrative or legislative measures. 


 
33. We now see a constant flow of information from States Parties in an area which was frankly stagnant before the Article VII action plan was adopted in 2003. 


 
34. These advances are the result of the joint efforts of the Secretariat and of many States Parties that have made financial contributions, hosted technical meetings, or cooperated with us on technical-assistance visits. 


 
35. I would note in particular the support that has been extended by the United States of America and by the European Union, both through its valued Joint Actions and through individual States Parties such as France, Portugal, Spain, and the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, all of which have co-hosted National Authority training courses this year. 


 
36. Regional and subregional meetings have also provided valuable opportunities for interactions between the Secretariat and National Authorities.  In this context I would like to thank Algeria, Burkina Faso, Colombia, Indonesia, Kyrgyzstan, Mexico, Peru, Republic of Korea, Saint Kitts and Nevis, United Arab Emirates, and United Republic of Tanzania.  Japan, New Zealand, and Norway have also supported us generously in this area. 


 
37. Just a few weeks ago, the Council recommended to the Conference that work continue under the plan of action.  I hope that the Conference will be able to approve this recommendation, so that next year we can report even more progress and fewer gaps in the implementation of Article VII obligations. 


 
International cooperation and assistance 
 
38. This core objective of the OPCW has once again spawned a number of remarkable achievements during the year.  


 
39. I am pleased to report that the Secretariat has conducted courses to support capacity-building in Colombia, Indonesia, Kuwait, Palau, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, and Uruguay.  


 
40. We have completed initial technical-assistance visits to Costa Rica, Mexico, and Peru, to assess their national and regional response systems.  We have also organised assistance-and-protection courses for first responders, working with the Governments of Chile, Czech Republic, Finland, Islamic Republic of Iran, Republic of Korea, Serbia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain, and Switzerland. 


 
41. The increasing demand for expert advice and assistance speaks for itself: In 2004, 6 States Parties requested such advice and support; in 2005, 13; and in 2006, 25.  This demand is particularly in evidence in countries that have recently joined the OPCW. 


 
42. Progress continues in other areas.  At its Forty-Sixth Session the Council requested the Secretariat to finish setting up, by this Session, the data bank of information on assistance and protection required under paragraph 5 of Article X.  I can now tell you that, earlier this month, the Secretariat brought the Protection and Assistance Databank, known as PAD, online, and that the information it contains is now available to Member States.  The Secretariat will update it as necessary. 


 
43. We will also continue to provide all the support we can to Member States.  I would appeal here to Member States to continue making voluntary contributions, whether financial or in the form of technical expertise. 


 
44. In addition, the Associate Programme, our flagship endeavour in the International Cooperation and Assistance Division, or ICA, has continued to move forward.  One hundred and thirty-two technical experts from 78 States Parties have benefited from the curriculum of the annual Programme over the last 7 years. 


 
45. Evaluators back in capitals will find it of interest that, as our post-implementation assessment has revealed, of the participants who attended the Programme up to and including 2005, 60 went on to assist their National Authority with the implementation of the Convention, 26 have been directly involved in assisting with the verification process, 43 have been involved in activities related to chemical safety, and 9 have joined us at the Secretariat.  The Programme seems to be fulfilling its objectives by providing knowledge and expertise that in turn benefit the OPCW community. 


 
46. Our course on the development of analytical skills has been further strengthened in 2006 through the introduction of a second unit.  We are grateful to the Finnish Institute for the Verification of the Chemical Weapons Convention, or VERIFIN, and to the Delft University of Technology here in the Netherlands, for conducting these courses so ably.  I would also thank the EU for its financial support. 


 
47. Before concluding my remarks on international cooperation, I would like to inform you that Dr John Makhubalo, Director of the International Cooperation and Assistance Division, or ICA will soon be leaving the Organisation.  Dr Makhubalo’s departure, after many years of loyal and dedicated service, is the result of the non-career nature of our Organisation. 


 
48. We will greatly miss John’s talent, imagination, and support.  It was John Makhubalo who set up ICA, and who developed it into the efficient unit we all know today.  Under his guidance, ICA has been able to fulfil the ambitious mandate it has under Articles X and XI.  As I have noted, our activities in this area are well established and well supported. 


 
49. As one would expect from a distinguished chemist and scholar, John Makhubalo knows the right formula to use to balance the requests we receive from States Parties with our own programming priorities.  He is leaving many friends behind, and we all wish him the best for the future.  


 
50. When John Makhubalo leaves us in March next year, a distinguished African diplomat, the Permanent Representative of Kenya to the OPCW, Ambassador Dr Kalimi M. Mworia, will become Director of ICA.  I am grateful to her for having accepted my invitation to join the Secretariat, and to the Government of Kenya for having facilitated this important development. 


 
51. In addition to her diplomatic skills and her background in chemistry, Ambassador Mworia will bring to her new role many years of experience running development-and-assistance programmes in Kenya, where she has excelled at managing the delivery of assistance in important social areas, in strict accordance with the principles of best managerial practice. 


 
52. I am confident that Ambassador Mworia will continue in John Makhubalo’s footsteps to the satisfaction of all States Parties.  The Secretariat and, I am sure, all States Parties, are ready to support her. 


 
53. Last but not least, I would point out that Ambassador Mworia will be the first woman in the history of the OPCW to serve in the Secretariat’s top management. 


 
Administration and human resources 
 
54. The Conference has before it a number of important financial matters to consider, chief among them the 2007 Draft Programme and Budget. 


 
55. I referred a few moments ago to one of the important issues in the 2007 Draft Programme and Budget—OCPF inspections, which pose such a challenge to the OPCW. 


 
56. On this and indeed all fronts, the 2007 Draft Programme and Budget presents the Secretariat’s best judgement on balanced programme priorities. 


 
57. This Draft Programme and Budget provides for a range of new spending initiatives for next year, and fully allows for expected price growth.  However, delegations will note that spending next year is to stay at practically the same net expenditure levels appropriated for the current year.  In fact, there is to be a small reduction:  If this Draft Programme and Budget is adopted by the Conference, next year States Parties will benefit from an average reduction in annual contributions of 1.7%. 


 
58. Although fiscal discipline is one of my guiding principles as Director-General, I would like to assure delegations that, in presenting a zero–nominal-growth budget, we have not set out to cut programmes.  In fact, the Secretariat has undertaken a coordinated effort to identify an appropriate balance of achievable programme priorities for next year.  We have worked to ensure that we can continue to strive for maximum efficiency when putting together the resources for our operations, and we have thus kept budget estimates accurate. 


 
59. The optimisation of resources that the Secretariat has achieved in recent years will again allow us to meet the OPCW’s mandate for verifying the destruction of chemical weapons without significant staff increases.  Here, too, we will be doing more with less. 


 
60. Significantly, in order that the Secretariat can meet the growing demand by States Parties for ICA activities, the direct programme funding proposed will be almost 10% higher under the 2007 Programme and Budget than the level appropriated in 2005. 


 
61. During this Session, delegations will have the opportunity to establish a mechanism, which the Council has recommended and which involves the use of multi-year payment plans, to encourage States Parties that are in arrears to regularise their financial obligations to the OPCW.  Such a mechanism would bring OPCW practice into line with that followed by most organisations within the UN common system.  


 
62. Delegations also have before them a Note on income and expenditure that covers the period to the end of September 2006.  It shows that the Secretariat has been on track in spending more of its appropriations for programme delivery in 2006 than it has been for some years.  I should point out, however, that, were it not for the financial cushion provided by cash surpluses still held from previous years, the Secretariat would have had to draw on the Working Capital Fund, because some individual States Parties have not met their financial obligations to the OPCW in full and on time.  I appeal to them to do so in the future, and to make their payments for 2006 in full before the end of the year. 


 
63. This week the Conference also has before it for adoption a minor amendment to the OPCW’s Financial Regulations that follows from an important milestone the OPCW reached earlier this year.  In July, the Council approved the OPCW’s first set of Financial Rules, as required under the Regulations.  The amendment to the Regulations simply follows from these Rules and from an earlier amendment to the Regulations adopted by the Conference at a previous session. 


 
64. The Secretariat has prepared performance reports for the first half of 2006, using as a basis the results-based budgeting, or RBB, objectives and performance indicators that appear in the Draft Programme and Budget for this year.  The use of RBB and of performance reporting is evolving in this and other international organisations. 


 
65. The Secretariat is confident that RBB will conduce to a results-based management and organisational culture in which programmes, actions, and decisions are motivated by the requirement to achieve obtainable results.  This process will, we hope, lead to improved performance and efficiency each year.  


 
66. Allow me to turn now to human resources.  As States Parties will recall, the Council at its Forty-Seventh Session made a recommendation to the Conference on the future implementation of the tenure policy of the OPCW.  The proposed decision would amend subparagraph 1(c) of the Conference decision on the policy (C-SS-2/DEC.1, dated 30 April 2003) to read as follows: 


 
“as a one-time measure, which does not set a precedent for the future, this exceptional authority of the Director-General to grant contract extensions or renewals beyond the seven-year total length of service provided for in Staff Regulation 4.4(b) shall expire effective 29 April 2012.  At that time, no staff subject to tenure with a total length of service in excess of seven years, other than those falling under the provisions of Staff Regulation 4.4(b) (i) and (ii), may remain on staff.” 
 
67. It is crucial to understand that, in adopting this decision, the Conference would be confirming the validity of the tenure policy, while at the same time giving the Secretariat the practical means to implement it in a financially viable and operationally more rational way.  With this amendment, the tenure policy would continue to be implemented as it has been up until now, but with the necessary additional flexibility. 


 
68. The Human Resources Branch is continuing to make improvements in all areas of recruitment.  It has implemented an online application system both to encourage wider notifications of vacancies and to reduce the time it takes to fill posts.  Currently, the HRB aims to recruit a P-level staff member in less than 150 days.  It aims to further reduce that figure to 120 by the end of 2007—60 of which would be used to advertise the vacancy. 


 
69. In an environment shaped by the tenure policy, and thus by regular staff turnover, such improvements will, we believe, help the Secretariat to management human resources even more efficiently. 


 
Establishment of an OPCW Office in Africa 
 
70. Last year, the Conference recommended that the Council establish an open-ended working group that would examine various ways in which to enhance the OPCW’s presence in Africa.  Deliberations since then have been fruitful, and we have been able to elucidate a number of practical matters.  However, we seem to need some more time to determine how the initiative should be realised.  The recommendation from the Council stresses this point and provides for the continuation of this work in 2007, under the able stewardship of the facilitator, Mr Rugeles of Colombia, and I would just reaffirm here the Secretariat’s readiness to continue supporting these deliberations. 


 
Universality 
 
71. I have provided an outline that shows continued progress in important areas of the work of the OPCW.  Indeed, we can take more than a little satisfaction at the advances the Organisation has made in the nine years since implementation of the Convention began. 


 
72. Nevertheless, much remains to be done before we can claim any real success.  For instance, our task will not be accomplished as long as there remains even a single country outside the realm of the Convention.  Will we actually be able to claim real success after all possessor States Parties have destroyed all of their chemical weapons, if universality has not been achieved by then? 


 
73. We are all familiar with the saying, “The strength of a chain is the strength of its weakest link.” It is particularly apt here: The chain of global commitment and determination to proscribe chemical weapons could be broken at any time by a single weak link—a country that was determined to circumvent the Convention, or a terrorist group that managed to exploit the opportunities available in a country that lacked the internal mechanism and legal measures required of all States Parties. 


 
74. That is why our efforts to achieve universality must continue unabated and, if anything, be intensified.  This being said, we can take some satisfaction at the enormous progress that has been made thus far.  Membership in the Convention continues to grow. With the recent succession to the Convention by Montenegro, the number of States Parties has risen to 181, thus exceeding the target of 180 States Parties that the Conference at its Tenth Session set as our objective for 2006. 


 
75. In all, since the Tenth Session, six countries have become States Parties, and I am pleased to be able to extend a warm welcome to them: Central African Republic, Comoros, Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia, and Montenegro. 


 
76. There are now only 14 States not Party, and some of these are making substantial progress towards accession or ratification; we continue to work closely with these.   


 
77. Next week we will be holding a further workshop for the benefit of Iraqi officials, in what will be the third event designed to help Iraq fulfil its implementation obligations once it joins the Convention.  I wish to thank all those States Parties that have supported these training workshops, and especially the Government of Jordan for hosting two of them. 


 
78. Since I have mentioned the Middle East, I think it is appropriate to say a few words here about our efforts to promote universality in this troubled region. 


 
79. I should like to start by welcoming all observer delegations from that region.  This includes Iraq, Israel, and Lebanon and, for the first time, Egypt.  I only regret that the Syrian Arab Republic has not sent a delegation this time. 


 
80. I hope that the observers from the Middle East will benefit from their attendance, and that they will be able to confirm firsthand the expectations the international community harbours that they will join the Convention.  I say this not as a mere formality, but based on an unshakeable and widely shared conviction regarding the strong legal, moral, and practical reasons that make it imperative that these countries join the Convention. 


 
81. In this context, too, I would like to recall that, a few weeks ago, and thanks to the generous hospitality of Italy and the financial support of the EU, an important workshop on the universality of the Convention in the Middle East and the Mediterranean Basin was held in Rome.  There, in the presence of delegations from Israel, Lebanon, and Syrian Arab Republic, and of a representative from Egypt, we discussed once again the high priority that the Convention must have in the Middle East.  I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude once again to the Government of Italy for its generosity in hosting this workshop. 


 
82. On that occasion, I said that there can be no moral or strategic justification for keeping open the chemical weapons option. 


 
83. First, chemical weapons are illegal.  The Convention is the culmination of a series of efforts to ban chemical weapons and other poisonous means of warfare.  These started with the Hague conventions of 1899 and 1907 and the Geneva Protocol of 1925. 


 
84. The Convention bans all chemical weapons without distinction and in all States Parties, and thus constitutes a universal norm that no government can expect to ignore or violate without causing a global outcry and probably triggering a swift response from the United Nations Security Council. 


 
85. But chemical weapons are not only illegal—they are also immoral.  For what is their main purpose if it is not to kill, maim, and terrorise innocent civilians?  It matters little whether these weapons are in the hands of aggressive governments or of non-state actors. 


 
86. Chemical weapons are also of limited military value.  Authoritative military analysts, including those from the Middle East, have increasingly been coming to the same conclusion.  Their strategic significance is doubtful, and their tactical impact can only be limited.  Modern armies are well equipped and are prepared to deal with them.  Unprotected civilians can be their only target. 


 
87. Some have averred a political linkage between chemical and nuclear weapons in the Middle East.  However, that position also falls to the ground.  From a legal point of view it is worth recalling that, in contrast to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, the Convention establishes a universal regime without gaps, loopholes, exceptions, or strategic reservations, and without any distinctions between the haves and the have-nots: There is no “chemical weapons club”. 


 
88. Militarily speaking, as I have just said, there can be no doubt about the enormous differences between the apocalyptically destructive power of nuclear weapons and the limited destructiveness of chemical weapons, which are simply no deterrent to, or match for, a nuclear threat. 


 
89. Given the legal and strategic differences between chemical and nuclear weapons, they should not be linked politically: Making the fate of the Convention dependent on the overall solution to the complex situation in the Middle East would amount to creating an unwarranted link between two different kinds of weapon of mass destruction.  Furthermore, it would result in an indefinite continuation of the present impasse, in which the Convention, which represents a forceful legal imperative in itself, would be held hostage to the nuclear issue. 


 
90. It would also be difficult to understand how remaining outside the Convention could contribute to peace in that part of the world, which has suffered so long. 


 
91. Against this background, we continue to appeal to our friends in the Middle East to revisit the issue with a constructive attitude and to consider that, in joining the overwhelming majority of nations in their support for the Convention, they will be making an effective contribution to peace and security in their own region. 


 
92. Our efforts in the area of universality face other difficulties, as the Convention continues to be confronted with the absolute indifference shown by the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea. 


 
93. In this regard, I must recall that UN Security Council Resolution 1718, which was adopted after the nuclear test that the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea carried out last October, requires it to abandon all existing weapons-of-mass-destruction programmes.  I wish to reiterate today the readiness of the Secretariat to assist the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, should it accept our offer, with the process of accession.  I also hope that, at the right moment, the chemical weapons issue will be placed on the agenda of the six-party talks. 


 
94. In Africa, despite the gains of the last three years, five States have yet to join the Convention.  All of these are in contact with us and, as I mentioned earlier, in some cases we expect progress in the very near future. 


 
95. In Latin America and the Caribbean, only Bahamas, Barbados, and Dominican Republic remain outside the Convention.  These are the only three States not Party in the entire Western Hemisphere. 

96. Next week, I will be in Washington to address a session of the Special Commission on Hemispheric Security of the Organization of American States.  There, I intend to hold meetings with representatives of these three States not Party, with the aim of fostering decisive progress on their part towards joining the Convention. 


 
97. Delegations have before them for consideration my annual report on the implementation this year of the action plan for universality.  The report summarises some of the issues I have just mentioned.  The Conference has a recommendation from the Council to continue in the coming year the work that has been conducted under the action plan. 


 
New challenges 
 
98. New challenges are being generated by developments in science and technology.  The continual strides being made in science generally, and by the global chemical industry in particular, are bound to have an effect on the way in which the Convention operates, both now and in the future.  Nanotechnology and micro-reactors, to take just one example, create new conditions and thus new demands on the ways in which industry verification is carried out. 


 
99. Mobility and flexibility in production techniques, the shrinking size of production units, and new capabilities to produce an ever-wider range of toxic chemicals—all of these emerging factors will undoubtedly affect our operations and put them to the test. 


 
100. Just as important in this context are the development of new chemicals, the sometimes blurred boundaries between chemistry and biology, and the production of new types of weapons.  These, too, could have a concrete impact on the operation of the Convention. 


 
101. Similarly, it is important to continue to consult, and to exchange views and information, on the contribution the OPCW can make to the global struggle against terrorism. 


 
102. Seminal documents, such as UN Security Council Resolution 1540 and the recently approved UN strategy against terrorism, have a direct relation to the OPCW’s activities and constitute important points of reference for our future work.  It is clear that the international community expects the Organisation, responsible as it is for chemical disarmament and non-proliferation, to play an effective role in such efforts. 


 
Second Review Conference 
 
103. While we continue our regular work, we are also making preparations for the upcoming Second Review Conference, which will take place in April 2008.  To facilitate this, the Council has already established an open-ended working group chaired by Ambassador Lyn Parker of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland.  The group has made a promising start. 


 
104. We move now to the substantive phase of the group’s work, where key issues will be scrutinised in a systematic way, as befits a true review process.  I assure Ambassador Parker and his bureau, as well as all States Parties, of our full support throughout the preparations for the Second Review Conference. Tenth Anniversary 



 
105. I would like to conclude by referring to a subject that will concentrate a good deal of our attention next year, and whose significance goes beyond the merely symbolic.  As you may recall, during the Tenth Session of the Conference, an International Day of Remembrance for All Victims of Chemical Weapons was established. 


 
106. Immediately after that decision was made, we also started preparing for the events that will take place to mark the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention and the establishment of our Organisation. 


 
107. The Secretariat has prepared an information Note describing the main tenth-anniversary events, but I would still like to highlight the central act of commemoration, which will take place on 9 May 2007 in the presence of Her Majesty Queen Beatrix of the Netherlands.  Her Majesty will preside over the ceremonies and will unveil a Permanent Memorial to All Victims of Chemical Weapons.  The Memorial will be located in the vicinity of OPCW headquarters. 


 
108. I would like to take this opportunity—and I know I am speaking here for all other States Parties—to thank the Government of the Netherlands, our host country, and to our home city, The Hague, for their support and generosity in contributing to the events that will be marking the tenth anniversary.  A significant part of this support has been financial, but our hosts have also offered assistance in organising a number of activities, such as an academic forum and an industry-and-protection event, both of which will take place next year. 


 
109. As the information Note also reports, other States Parties are also planning important tenth-anniversary events.  Germany, which will hold the rotating presidency of the EU in the first half of 2007, is preparing a major conference in Berlin for next year.  I will be opening this major event together with the German Foreign Minister, Dr Frank-Walter Steinmeier. 


 
110. The United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland has also indicated its intention to organise an event, as have Belgium, Croatia, and United States of America, and I am sure that other States Parties will be announcing similar commemoration plans.  These activities constitute tangible proof of the commitment of States Parties to the object and purpose of the Convention. 


 
111. What all of these efforts confirm, indeed, is that, 10 years after its entry into force, the Convention is increasingly regarded as a successful example of effective multilateralism.  I know you all join me in celebrating this spirit of commitment, and the rededication to the solemn purpose of the Convention that the tenth-anniversary observances will allow us to express. 


 
112. Allow me to express, in closing, the wish that your deliberations will yield the indispensable decisions and guidance that will steer our work in the milestone year ahead.  The Eleventh Session of the Conference is underway; let us do all we can to make it a success.  Thank you very much. 


 
- - - o - - - 

