OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 


Third Session C-III/4 16 - 20 November 1998 20 November 1998 Original: ENGLISH 
REPORT OF THE THIRD SESSION 
OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

1. 	Introduction 
1.1 	The following 96 States Parties participated in the Third Session of the Conference of the States Parties (hereinafter the “Conference”): Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, India, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Republic of Moldova, Romania, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United Republic of Tanzania, United States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, and Zimbabwe. 
1.2 	In accordance with Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the following 16 signatory States participated in this session of the Conference: Cape Verde, Chad, Colombia, Estonia, Gabon, Guatemala, Haiti, Holy See, Indonesia (a contracting State Party which will become a State Party on 12 December 1998), Israel, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nicaragua, Nigeria, Thailand, and United Arab Emirates.  
1.3 	In accordance with Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, and pursuant to decision C-III/DEC.2, dated 16 November 1998, representatives of the following non-signatory States were granted observer status: Eritrea and Libyan Arab Jamahiriya. 
CS-1998-1029 
1.4 	The Conference, in decision C-III/DEC.1, dated 16 November 1998, approved the participation of the following international organisations in this session of the Conference: the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty Organisation (PrepCom CTBTO), the International Bureau of the Permanent Court of Arbitration (PCA), the United Nations Institute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR), the Secretariat of the Basel Convention, and the Conference on Disarmament.  
1.5 	
The Conference, in decision C-III/DEC.3, dated 16 November 1998, approved the participation of twelve non-governmental organisations and industry representatives in this session of the Conference.  

2. 	
AGENDA ITEM ONE - Opening of the session 


The Third Session of the Conference was opened on 16 November 1998 by the Chairman of the Second Session of the Conference, Ambassador Simbarashe S. Mumbengegwi of Zimbabwe. 
3. 	AGENDA ITEM TWO - Election of the Chairman 
In accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of its Rules of Procedure, the Conference elected by acclamation as its Chairman Ambassador Young-shik Song of the Republic of Korea, who shall hold office until his successor is elected at the next regular session of the Conference. 
4. 	AGENDA ITEM THREE - Election of Vice-Chairmen and other officers 
4.1 	In accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, Representatives of the following ten States Parties were elected as Vice-Chairmen of the Conference: Algeria, Kenya (Africa); Iran (Islamic Republic of), Mongolia (Asia); Czech Republic, Slovakia (Eastern Europe); Peru, Uruguay (Latin America and the Caribbean); France, and the United States of America (WEOG). 
4.2 	
Also in accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, Ambassador Carl Gerhardus Niehaus of South Africa was elected Chairman of the Committee of the Whole until a new Chairman is elected for this body at the next regular session of the Conference. 

5. 	
AGENDA ITEM FOUR - Adoption of the agenda 


The Conference adopted the following agenda for its Third Session: 
1. 	
AGENDA ITEM ONE - Opening of the session 

2. 	
AGENDA ITEM TWO - Election of the Chairman 

3. 	
AGENDA ITEM THREE - Election of Vice-Chairmen and other officers 


C-III/4 page 3 
4. 	
AGENDA ITEM FOUR - Adoption of the agenda 

5. 	
AGENDA ITEM FIVE -Organisation of work and establishment of subsidiary bodies 

6. 	
AGENDA ITEM SIX - Appointment of Credentials Committee 

7. 	
AGENDA ITEM SEVEN - Election of Confidentiality Commission 

8. 	
AGENDA ITEM EIGHT - Statement by the Director-General 

9. 	
AGENDA ITEM NINE - General debate 

10. 	
AGENDA ITEM TEN - Draft Report of the Organisation on the year 1997 

11. 	
AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN -Report of the Executive Council on the performance of its activities 

12. 	
AGENDA ITEM TWELVE - Election of members of the Executive Council 

13. 	
AGENDA ITEM THIRTEEN -The programme and budget of the Organisation, submitted by the Executive Council for the ensuing financial period, and all items pertaining to this budget 

14. 	
AGENDA ITEM FOURTEEN -The scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties 

15. 	
AGENDA ITEM FIFTEEN -Fostering of international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities 

16. 	
AGENDA ITEM SIXTEEN - Reports of subsidiary bodies 

(a) 	
Committee of the Whole 

(b) 	
General Committee 

(c) 	
Confidentiality Commission 

(d) 	
Credentials Committee 

(e) 	
Scientific Advisory Board 



17. 	
AGENDA ITEM SEVENTEEN - Staff Regulations 

18. 	
AGENDA ITEM EIGHTEEN - Any other business 

19. 	
AGENDA ITEM NINETEEN -Date and duration of the next regular session of the Conference of the States Parties 

20. 	
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY -Adoption of the Report of the Conference of the States Parties 

21. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-ONE - Closure 


C-III/4 page 5 
6. 	AGENDA ITEM FIVE -Organisation of work and establishment of subsidiary bodies 
6.1 	The Conference, noting that no request for a supplementary item had been received by the Director-General, and that no request for an additional agenda item had been received by the General Committee, under Rules 14 and 20 respectively of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, adopted the recommendation of the General Committee to approve the agenda for this session of the Conference as circulated under cover of C-III/1*, dated 16 September 1998. 
6.2 	The Conference referred the following items from its agenda to the Committee of the Whole, to consider and report back: the programme and budget of the Organisation, submitted by the Executive Council (hereinafter the “Council”) for the ensuing financial period, and all items pertaining to this budget; the scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties; the costs of the verification of old chemical weapons and of abandoned chemical weapons; the draft relationship agreement with the United Nations; the OPCW staff regulations; and, from any other business, the revised list of inspection equipment and specifications for approved equipment.  
6.3 	
The Conference adopted the recommendation of the General Committee to close the Third Session of the Conference on 20 November 1998.  

7. 	
AGENDA ITEM SIX - Appointment of Credentials Committee 


In accordance with Rule 27 of its Rules of Procedure, the Conference, on the proposal of its Chairman, appointed the following ten members of the Credentials Committee to hold office until new members are appointed at the next regular session of the Conference: Algeria, Cameroon, Japan, the Philippines, Chile, Mexico, Croatia, Slovakia, Belgium, and New Zealand.  
8. 	AGENDA ITEM SEVEN - Appointment of Confidentiality Commission 
The Conference appointed to the Commission on the Settlement of Disputes Relating to Confidentiality (“Confidentiality Commission”) the following 20 members, for a two-year period commencing on 23 May 1999: 
Africa: 	Dr Laurraine Lotter (South Africa), Mr David William Chikaka (Zimbabwe), Prof. Mohammed Mokhtar Dridi (Algeria), Dr Driss Hajir (Morocco); 
Asia: 	Professor Masahiko Asada (Japan), Dr Jamshid Momtaz (Iran, Islamic Republic of), Dr R.V. Swamy (India), Mr Gong Chunsen (China); 
Eastern Europe: 	Dr Jaroslav Fiedler (Czech Republic), Mr Yuri Nickolaevich Marakhovsky (Russian Federation), Mr Zoltán Pecze (Hungary), Major Valery Dmitrievich Ziablov (Belarus); 
Latin America and the Caribbean:  Mrs Ana Maria Cerini (Argentina), Mr Jesús Cuevillas Domínguez (Cuba), Prof. José Luz González Chávez (Mexico), Mr Camilo Sanhueza Bezanilla (Chile);  
WEOG:  Dr Karl F. Jorda (USA), Prof. Dr Eric P.J. Myjer (Netherlands), Prof. Dr Dieter C. Umbach (Germany), Dr Ignacio Vignote (Spain).  
9.  AGENDA ITEM EIGHT - Statement by the Director-General  
The Conference noted the statement by the Director-General (C-III/DG.12, dated 16 November 1998).  
10.  AGENDA ITEM NINE - General debate  
The following delegations made statements during the general debate: Austria (on behalf of the European Union and countries which associated themselves with this statement), Japan, Czech Republic, United States of America, Russian Federation, Ukraine, Argentina, Pakistan, Zimbabwe, Norway, South Africa, Republic of Korea, Canada, Singapore, Switzerland, China, Kenya, Saudi Arabia, Slovakia, India, Indonesia, Croatia, Oman, Mexico, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Venezuela, Peru, Australia, Algeria, Brazil, Bangladesh, Bahrain, and Panama.  
11.  AGENDA ITEM TEN - Draft report of the Organisation on the year 1997   
11.1  The Conference considered and approved the "Report of the Organisation on the Implementation of the Convention (29 April - 31 December 1997)" (C-III/3, dated 20 November 1998).  
11.2  The Conference noted the report by the Director-General on the implementation of the regime governing the handling of confidential information by the Technical Secretariat in the period 29 April 1997 -23 October 1998 (C-III/DG.8, dated 4 November 1998, and Corr.1, dated 13 November 1998), and comments by States Parties.   
11.3  The Conference decided to task the Council to further discuss the issue of transparency, and to prepare a format for reporting information to the Council on the verification activities, including inspection results, conducted by the Technical Secretariat in accordance with relevant provisions of the Convention, including in the Confidentiality Annex, the OPCW Confidentiality Policy, and the OPCW Media and Public Affairs Policy.  
11.4  The Conference requested the Technical Secretariat to present to the Council at its Fourteenth Session a report on how it implements the provisions of paragraphs 12 of Parts VII and VIII of the Verification Annex.  

C-III/4 page 7 
12. 	AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN -Report of the Executive Council on the performance of its activities 
12.1 	The Conference noted the "Report of the Executive Council on the Performance of its Activities (1 November 1997 -4 September 1998)" (EC-XII/2*, dated 9 October 1998). The report was introduced by the Chairman of the Council, Mr Krzysztof Paturej of Poland (C-III/INF.5, dated 17 November 1998). 
12.2 	The Conference took the following action on the basis of recommendations and decisions of the Council: 
(a) 	
End-use certificates for transfers of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals to States not party to the Convention 

(i) 	
The Conference, in accordance with the decision of the Council at its Eighth Session on end-use certificates for transfers of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals to States not party to the Convention in accordance with paragraph 32 of Part VII and paragraph 26 of Part VIII of the Verification Annex of the Convention (EC-VIII/DEC.3, dated 30 January 1998), considered and adopted the decision on the same subject (C-III/DEC.7, dated 17 November 1998). 

(ii) 	
The Conference, in accordance with the decision of the Council at its Ninth Session on paragraph 32 of Part VII and paragraph 26 of Part VIII of the Verification Annex of the Convention (EC-IX/DEC.11, dated 24 April 1998), considered and adopted the decision on the same subject (C-III/DEC.6, also dated 17 November 1998).  



(b) 	
Model facility agreement for Schedule 1 facilities 


The Conference, in accordance with C-II/DEC.3, dated 5 December 1997, as well as with the decision of the Council at its Twelfth Session (EC-XII/DEC.1, dated 9 October 1998), considered and adopted the decision on a model facility agreement for Schedule 1 facilities (C-III/DEC.14, dated 20 November 1998). In adopting this decision, the Conference noted the concerns reflected in the report of the Twelfth Session of the Council about the implications of this decision for already approved facility agreements and/or arrangements (subparagraph 7.2 of EC-XII/3, dated 9 October 1998). 
(c) 	Model facility agreement for Schedule 2 plant sites 
The Conference, in accordance with C-II/DEC.3, dated 5 December 1997, as well as with the decision of the Council at its Eleventh Session (EC-XI/DEC.4, dated 4 September 1998), considered and adopted the decision on a model facility agreement for Schedule 2 plant sites (C-III/DEC.15, dated 20 November 1998).  
C-III/4 page 8  
(d)  Draft agreements on privileges and immunities of the OPCW  
The Conference, noting the related decision of the Council at its Eleventh Session (EC-XI/DEC.6, dated 4 September 1998), considered and adopted the decision on agreements with Denmark and Ghana respectively on the privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-III/DEC.4, dated 17 November 1998).  
(e)  Costs of verification under Articles IV and V  
In accordance with the decision of the Conference at its Second Session on the Programme and Budget for 1998 and Working Capital Fund (C-II/DEC.17*, dated 5 December 1997), and with the decision taken ad referendum by the Council at its Eleventh Session and confirmed by the Council at its Twelfth Session (EC-XI/DEC.1, dated 4 September 1998), the Conference considered and adopted the decision on the costs of verification under Articles IV and V (C-III/DEC.8, dated 17 November 1998). The Conference took note of the cost-saving methods contained in Council decision EC-XI/DEC.1, dated 4 September 1998, and reiterated the request made by the Council to the Technical Secretariat concerning cost-saving methods for Article IV and V inspections.  
(f)  The attribution of costs related to inspections of old and abandoned chemical weapons  
The Conference requested the Council to continue addressing the issue of the attribution of the costs related to inspections of old and abandoned chemical weapons, with a view to making appropriate recommendations for a decision to be taken on these matters by the Conference at its Fourth Session.    
(g)  Draft relationship agreement with the United Nations  
During the Third Session of the Conference, intensive consultations were conducted. No final decision was reached on this issue. Therefore, the Conference requested the Council to continue addressing the issue of the relationship agreement with the United Nations with a view to reaching a resolution by the Conference at its Fourth Session.   
(h)  Status of implementation of the Convention  
Submission of declarations  
The Conference of the States Parties,   
bearing in mind the importance of the full implementation by all States Parties of all their commitments under the Convention and of adherence to all its provisions without conditions;  

C-III/4 page 9 
took note of the Director General’s report on the status of initial declarations and notifications (C-III/DG.11, dated 13 November 1998, and Corr.1,dated 19 November 1998), and of subparagraphs 16.1 -16.4 of the report of the Council on its Twelfth Session (EC-XII/3), and, in this context, noted with interest recent submissions of initial declarations by some States Parties, and also recent announcements by some States Parties as to their intentions with regard to declarations; 
expressed its serious concern at the significant number of States Parties to the Convention which have submitted no initial declarations or initial declarations in part only; 
noted that the timely submission of declarations is a basic prerequisite for the implementation of the verification regime instituted by the Convention; 
also noted, with concern, the non-submission of annual destruction plans in some cases, as well as delay in the start of destruction processes; 
urged States Parties to the Convention which have failed to submit their initial declarations on time, particularly in the context of paragraph 7 of Article IV, paragraph 9 of Article V, and paragraph 7 of Article VI, to submit without further delay their initial declarations; 
also urged States Parties to the Convention which have submitted declarations in part only, particularly in the context of paragraph 7 of Article IV, paragraph 9 of Article V, and paragraph 7 of Article VI, to submit without further delay the necessary additional parts of declarations or data required for their initial declarations to be complete; 
also called on States Parties to submit their annual declarations containing the complete data required under paragraph 8 of Article VI and relevant parts of the Verification Annex within the time lines prescribed; 
requested the Director-General to bring this matter to the urgent attention of the States Parties concerned, and to draw to the attention of the States Parties concerned the assistance that the Technical Secretariat can render to States Parties which so request to facilitate the fulfilment of their obligations with regard to initial declarations; 
took note of the responsibility of the Conference under subparagraph 21(k) of Article VIII of the Convention for taking the necessary measures to ensure compliance with this Convention and, in accordance with Article XII, to remedy and redress any situation which contravenes the provisions of this Convention; 
and, bearing in mind the provisions of Article XII of the Convention, requested the Council to continue to monitor closely the fulfilment by States Parties of their obligations under the Convention to submit declarations on time and in full in order to enable the Council to consider recommendations to the Fourth Session of the Conference with a view to redressing the situation. 
(i) 	
Status of contributions 

(i) 	
The Conference noted that, as of the most recent report on the status of assessed contributions (C-III/DG.10, dated 13 November 1998), the contributions of sixty-nine, or 58%, of States Parties were in arrears, in whole or in part, for the current financial year. The Conference, noting that the Council had regularly expressed its concern about this, urged all States Parties in arrears with their contributions to the OPCW, for either 1997 or 1998, or for both, to meet their financial obligations forthwith, and drew attention to paragraph 8 of Article VIII of the Convention, which provides that a “member of the Organisation which is in arrears in the payment of its financial contribution to the Organisation shall have no vote in the Organisation if the amount of its arrears equals or exceeds the amount of the contributions due from it for the preceding two years.” 

(ii) 	
The Conference expressed its strong support for the concern expressed by the Council during the period since the Second Session of the Conference at the non-payment by Member States of the OPCW of assessed contributions owed to the Preparatory Commission, and urged all such States to meet their financial obligations in this regard forthwith.   



(j) 	
Reports of the External Auditors on the financial statements of the Preparatory Commission and the OPCW 

(i) 	
The Conference noted the audited financial statements of the Preparatory Commission for the OPCW for the period ended 31 May 1998 (C-III/DG.5, dated 27 August 1998), which were referred to the Conference by the Council at its Twelfth Session. 

(ii) 	
The Conference also noted the audited financial statements of the OPCW and the Provident Fund of the OPCW for the period ended 31 December 1997 (C-III/DG.4, also dated 27 August 1998), which were referred to the Conference by the Council at its Twelfth Session.   




13. 	AGENDA ITEM TWELVE - Election of members of the Executive Council 
In accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 23 of the Convention, and with Rule 83 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the following 21 States Parties were elected members of the Council, for a two-year term of office commencing on 12 May 1999: 
C-III/4 page 11 
Africa: 	Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Tunisia, Zimbabwe 
Asia: 	Bangladesh, China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, Saudi Arabia 
Eastern Europe: 	Romania, Ukraine 
Latin America 
and the Caribbean: Argentina, Brazil, Mexico 

WEOG: 	France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United States of America 
14. 	AGENDA ITEM THIRTEEN -The programme and budget of the Organisation, submitted by the Executive Council for the ensuing financial period, and all items pertaining to this budget 
14.1 	In accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its meeting held on 20 October 1998, the Conference considered and adopted the decision on the OPCW Programme and Budget for 1999 and the Working Capital Fund (C-III/DEC.16, dated 20 November 1998). 
14.2 	
The Conference requested the Council to consider the Draft Medium-Term Plan 1999 -2003 (C-III/DEC.17, dated 20 November 1998, and Corr.1, dated 19 November 1998), and to report back to it on this matter at the next regular session of the Conference. 

15. 	
AGENDA ITEM FOURTEEN -The scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties 


The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties for the financial year 1999 (C-III/DEC/CRP.18, dated 20 November 1998).   
16. 	AGENDA ITEM FIFTEEN -Fostering of international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities 
16.1 	The following delegations made statements in relation to this agenda item: Cuba, Zimbabwe, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Pakistan, India, Ethiopia, Australia, China, the Philippines, Canada, and Indonesia.  
16.2 	
The Conference discussed a proposal presented by the delegations of the Islamic Republic of Iran, Cuba and Pakistan (C-III/NAT.4, dated 19 November 1998) regarding the fostering of international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities. Given the time constraints, the Conference decided to refer the question to the Council for its consideration, with a view to the Council reporting its deliberations to the Conference at its Fourth Session. 

17. 	
AGENDA ITEM SIXTEEN - Reports of subsidiary bodies 


(a) 	Committee of the Whole 
17.1 	The Conference noted the report of the outgoing Chairman of the Committee of the Whole to the Conference on the results of the work on the unresolved issues during the second intersessional period (C-III/CoW.2, dated 16 November 1998).  Pursuant to the decision taken by the Conference at its Second Session on the procedure for addressing unresolved issues (C-II/DEC.3, dated 5 December 1997), the facilitators designated by Ambassador BjØrn Barth of Norway, the Chairman of the Committee of the Whole appointed by the Conference at its Second Session, reported to the Committee of the Whole, which took appropriate action as required. 
17.2 	The Conference received the reports of the Committee of the Whole (C-III/CoW.3, dated 17 November 1998, and C-III/CoW.4 and C-III/CoW.5, both dated 20 November 1998), and took appropriate action as required. 
(b) 	General Committee 
17.3 	The Conference received the report of the General Committee, and took appropriate action as required. 
(c) 	Confidentiality Commission 
17.4 	The Conference noted the report of the second meeting of the Confidentiality Commission (C-III/CC.1, dated 16 September 1998, and Corr.1, dated 30 September 1998).   
17.5 	The Conference approved the Operating Procedures of the Confidentiality Commission (C-III/DEC.10, dated 20 November 1998)). 
(d) 	Credentials Committee 
17.6 	The report of the Credentials Committee (C-III/2, dated 19 November 1998) was presented by its Chairman, Mr Matthew Broadhead of New Zealand. The Chairman orally reported that, following the close of the Credentials Committee meeting, formal credentials were received for the Representatives of Côte d’Ivoire, Italy, Jordan, Morocco, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia, and official communications were received regarding the representation of Gabon, Ghana, Lesotho, Mauritania and the United Republic of Tanzania. Formal credentials will be submitted for the latter in due course. The Conference noted this additional information, and approved the report. 
(e) 	Scientific Advisory Board 
17.7 	The Conference noted that, in accordance with the decision on the Scientific Advisory Board adopted at its Second Session (C-II/DEC.10, dated 5 December 1997), the Director-General had established a Scientific Advisory Board during 1998.  
C-III/4 page 13  
17.8  The Conference noted the report of the first session of the Scientific Advisory Board as submitted to the Director-General (C-III/DG.6, dated 6 October 1998, and Corr.1, dated 8 October 1998).   
18.  AGENDA ITEM SEVENTEEN - Staff Regulations  
18.1  During the Third Session of the Conference, intensive consultations continued on the draft staff regulations. While no final decision was reached, considerable progress was registered on a consensus text. In view of the urgent need to finalise the conditions of service of the staff at the earliest possible stage, the Conference, in accordance with paragraph 30 of Article VIII of the Convention, delegated to the Council authority to adopt the staff regulations for provisional implementation, pending confirmation by the Conference at its Fourth Session.  
18.2  The Conference further decided that the Interim Staff Regulations adopted by the Conference at its First Session (C-I/DEC.68, dated 22 May 1997) shall remain in force until the provisional entry into force of the staff regulations to be adopted in accordance with subparagraph 18.1 above.   
19.  AGENDA ITEM EIGHTEEN - Any other business  
Ensuring the universality of the Convention  
19.1  The Conference considered and adopted the recommendation on ensuring universality of the Convention (C-III/DEC.9, dated 20 November 1998).  the  
List of new inspection equipment inspection equipment  and  revised  specifications  for  approved  
19.2  The Conference considered the Note by the Director-General entitled “List of New Inspection Equipment and Revised Specifications for Approved Inspection Equipment” (C-III/DG.7*, dated 8 October 1998). In this respect, the Conference decided to request the Council to consider the proposals for new items of inspection equipment and for revised specifications of approved inspection equipment at its Fourteenth Session with a view to making appropriate recommendations to the Conference on the matter. The Conference requested the Technical Secretariat to provide States Parties with additional information on these proposals, including detailed justifications, technical descriptions of new items of inspection equipment, explanations as to the intended purposes of new items of inspection equipment, and information on the estimated item costs. This information should be made available to States Parties in time for review by technical experts from the States Parties during a meeting to be convened by the Technical Secretariat immediately after the Thirteenth Session of the Council.  
Compliance with Article VII: legislation, cooperation, and legal assistance  
19.3  The Conference took cognisance of the Note by the Director-General on compliance with Article VII: legislation, cooperation and legal assistance (C-III/DG.1/Rev.1,  

dated 17 November 1998). Article VII requires each State Party to adopt the necessary measures to implement its obligations under the Convention, including enacting penal legislation with respect to prohibited activities, and to inform the Organisation of the legislative and administrative measures taken. As of 10 November 1998, only 33% of States Parties had met this obligation. The Conference urged States Parties: (a) to complete, where necessary, the legislative and administrative measures to implement the Convention in their jurisdictions; (b) to inform the Organisation of such measures taken; and (c) to enhance possibilities of legal assistance among States Parties including through the convening by the OPCW of a seminar on national implementation and legal cooperation. 
Early termination of contract with sole supplier 
19.4 	The Conference took cognisance of the Notes by the Director-General on the early termination of the contract with the sole supplier (EC-XII/DG.4, dated 2 October 1998, and C-III/DG.9, dated 9 November 1998), as well as of the relevant recommendations of the Advisory Body on Administrative and Financial Matters (subparagraph 7.3 of ABAF-IV/3, dated 23 September 1998). In this regard the Conference also noted subparagraphs 16.7 -16.8 of the report of the Twelfth Session of the Council (EC-XII/3, dated 9 October 1998). 
19.5 	The Conference considered the draft decision on the termination of the contract with the sole supplier (C-III/DEC/CRP.13, dated 17 November 1998), and mandated the Council to adopt a final decision on this matter at its Thirteenth Session.  
Meaning of “production by synthesis” in the Verification Annex 
19.6 	The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the meaning of “production by synthesis” in Part IX of the Verification Annex (C-III/DEC.5, dated 19 November 1998). 
All aspects of the issue of chemical weapons buried by a State Party on its territory after 1976 or dumped at sea after 1984, including a possible challenge inspection, and its implications for the Technical Secretariat`s responsibilities 
19.7 	The Conference considered and adopted the decision on all aspects of the issue of chemical weapons buried by a State Party on its territory after 1976 or dumped at sea after 1984, including a possible challenge inspection, and its implications for the Technical Secretariat`s responsibilities (C-III/DEC.12, dated 20 November 1998). 
Understanding of what is considered a chemical weapon, in particular in relation to Article II, subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) (on the basis of the comments provided in relation to section D of the draft declaration handbook) 
19.8 	The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the understanding of what is considered a chemical weapon, in particular in relation to Article II, subparagraphs 1(b) and 1(c) (on the basis of the comments provided in relation to section D of the draft declaration handbook) (C-III/DEC.13, dated 20 November 1998). 
C-III/4 page 15 
Procedure for addressing unresolved issues during the third intersessional period 
19.9 	
The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the procedure for addressing unresolved issues during the third intersessional period (C-III/DEC.11, dated 20 November 1998, as adjusted by the Conference at this session). 

20. 	
AGENDA ITEM NINETEEN -Date and duration of the next regular session of the Conference 


The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its Second Session to hold the next regular session of the Conference from 28 June to 2 July 1999.  
21. 	AGENDA ITEM TWENTY - Adoption of the report of the Conference 
The Conference considered and adopted the report of its Third Session.   
22. 	AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-ONE - Closure 
The Chairman of the Third Session of the Conference made a statement on the issue of the improvement of informal communication between States Parties and the Technical Secretariat (C-III/INF.6, dated 20 November 1998), and closed the Third Session on 20 November 1998. 
 - - - o - - ­


