OPCW 

Conference of the States Parties 


Fifth Session C-V/6 
15 - 19 May 2000 19 May 2000 

Original: ENGLISH 

REPORT OF THE FIFTH SESSION 
OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 


1. 
Introduction 
1.1 
The following 109 States Parties participated in the Fifth Session of the Conference of 
the States Parties (hereinafter the “Conference”): Albania, Algeria, Argentina, 
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, 
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei Darussalam, 
Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Costa Rica, 
Côte d’Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador, 
El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, 
Ghana, Greece, Holy See, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran (Islamic Republic 
of), Ireland, Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kuwait, Latvia, Lesotho, 
Lithuania, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Namibia, Nepal, 
Netherlands, New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, 
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Republic of Korea, Romania, 
Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South 
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, The 
former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, 
Turkey, Ukraine, United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Viet Nam, and Zimbabwe. 
1.2 
The following two contracting States participated in this session of the Conference: 
the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia and Malaysia. 
1.3 
In accordance with Rule 29 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the 
following seven signatory States participated in this session of the Conference: Cape 
Verde, Gabon, Israel, Rwanda, Thailand, United Arab Emirates, and Yemen. 
1.4 
In accordance with Rule 30 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, and pursuant 
to decision C-V/DEC.1, dated 15 May 2000, a representative of the Libyan Arab 
Jamahiriya was granted observer status. 
1.5 
The Conference, in decision C-V/DEC.2, dated 15 May 2000, approved the 
participation of the following international organisations in this session of the 
Conference: the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban 
Treaty Organisation (CTBTO), the Permanent Court of Arbitration, the United 
Nations, and the International Criminal Tribunal for the former Yugoslavia. 
CS-2000-2022 


C-V/6 
page 2 

1.6 
The Conference, in decision C-V/DEC.3*, dated 15 May 2000, approved the 
participation of 16 non-governmental organisations and industry representatives in 
this session of the Conference. 
2. 
AGENDA ITEM ONE - Opening of the session 
The Fifth Session of the Conference was opened on 15 May 2000 by the Chairman of 
the Fourth Session of the Conference, Ambassador István Gyarmati of Hungary. 
The Conference received the message from the Secretary-General of the United 
Nations for the opening ceremony of this session of the Conference (C-V/2, dated 
15 May 2000). 

3. 
AGENDA ITEM TWO - Election of the Chairman 
In accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of its Rules of Procedure, the Conference, by 
acclamation, elected as its Chairman Ambassador Jaime Lagos of Chile, who shall 
hold office until his successor is elected at the next regular session of the Conference. 

4. 
AGENDA ITEM THREE - Election of Vice-Chairmen and other officers 
4.1 
In accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, 
Representatives of the following ten States Parties were elected as Vice-Chairmen of 
the Conference, to hold office until their successors are elected at the next regular 
session of the Conference: Ghana, Sudan (Africa); India, Indonesia (Asia); Croatia, 
the Russian Federation (Eastern Europe); Brazil, Cuba (Latin America and the 
Caribbean); France, and the United States of America (WEOG). 
4.2 
Also in accordance with Rules 34 and 35 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, 
Mr Krzysztof Paturej of Poland was elected Chairman of the Committee of the Whole 
until a new Chairman is elected for this body at the next regular session of the 
Conference. 
5. 
AGENDA ITEM FOUR - Adoption of the agenda 
The Conference adopted the following agenda for its Fifth Session: 

1. 
AGENDA ITEM ONE - Opening of the session 
2. 
AGENDA ITEM TWO - Election of the Chairman 
3. 
AGENDA ITEM THREE - Election of Vice-Chairmen and other officers 
4. 
AGENDA ITEM FOUR - Adoption of the agenda 
5. 
AGENDA ITEM FIVE -Organisation of work and establishment of subsidiary 
bodies 
6. 
AGENDA ITEM SIX - Appointment of Credentials Committee 

C-V/6 
page 3 

7. 
AGENDA ITEM SEVEN - Statement by the Director-General 
8. 
AGENDA ITEM EIGHT - General debate 
9. 
AGENDA ITEM NINE - Status of implementation of the Convention 
10. 
AGENDA ITEM TEN - Report of the Organisation on the year 1999 
11. 
AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN -Report of the Executive Council on the 
performance of its activities 
12. AGENDA ITEM TWELVE - Election of members of the Executive Council 
13. 
AGENDA ITEM THIRTEEN - Appointment of the External Auditor 
14. 
AGENDA ITEM FOURTEEN -Implementation of Section B of Part IX of the 
Verification Annex 
15. 
AGENDA ITEM FIFTEEN -Programme and budget of the Organisation, 
submitted by the Executive Council for the ensuing financial period, and all 
items pertaining to this budget 
16. 
AGENDA ITEM SIXTEEN - Scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties 
17. 
AGENDA ITEM SEVENTEEN -Fostering of international cooperation for 
peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities 
18. 
AGENDA ITEM EIGHTEEN - Ensuring universality of the Convention 
19. 
AGENDA ITEM NINETEEN - Appointment of the Director-General 
20. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY - Any other business 
21. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-ONE -Date and duration of the next regular 
session of the Conference of the States Parties 
22. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-TWO - Reports of subsidiary bodies 
(a) 
Committee of the Whole 
(b) 
General Committee 
(c) 
Confidentiality Commission 
(d) 
Credentials Committee 
23. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-THREE -Adoption of the report of the 
Conference of the States Parties 
24. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-FOUR - Closure 

C-V/6 
page 4 

6. 
AGENDA ITEM FIVE -Organisation of work and establishment of subsidiary 
bodies 
6.1 
The Conference, noting that no request for a supplementary item had been received by 
the Director-General, and that no request for an additional agenda item had been 
received by the General Committee, under Rules 14 and 20 respectively of the Rules 
of Procedure of the Conference, adopted the recommendation of the General 
Committee to approve the agenda for this session of the Conference as contained in 
C-V/1, dated 1 March 2000. 
6.2 
Under Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the Executive Council 
(hereinafter the “Council”) referred to the General Committee a proposal to place on 
the agenda of the Conference an additional item -the appointment of the 
Director-General. The General Committee reported this proposal promptly to the 
Conference, which approved it. 
6.3 
The Conference referred the following items to the Committee of the Whole, to 
consider and report back: appointment of the External Auditor; the implementation of 
Section B of Part IX of the Verification Annex; the fostering of international 
cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities; the reporting of 
ricin production; the authentication and certification procedure for the Central OPCW 
Analytical Database and on-site databases; and guidelines for assessing whether 
laboratories may retain their designated status. 
6.4 
The Conference adopted the recommendation of the General Committee to close the 
Fifth Session of the Conference on 19 May 2000. 
7. 
AGENDA ITEM SIX - Appointment of Credentials Committee 
In accordance with Rule 27 of its Rules of Procedure, the Conference, on the proposal 
of its Chairman, appointed the following ten members of the Credentials Committee 
to hold office until new members are appointed at the next regular session of the 
Conference: Bangladesh, Bolivia, Bulgaria, Cameroon, Namibia, the Netherlands, 
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Ukraine, and Uruguay. 

8. 
AGENDA ITEM SEVEN - Statement by the Director-General 
The Conference noted the opening statement by the Director-General (C-V/DG.11, 
dated 15 May 2000). 

9. 
AGENDA ITEM EIGHT - General debate 
The following delegations made statements during the general debate: Japan, Portugal 
(on behalf of the European Union and associated countries), Nigeria, Switzerland, the 
United States of America, Greece, China, Ukraine, the Republic of Korea, Chile, 
India, Canada, Peru, the Czech Republic, Cuba, the Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, 
Sri Lanka, Australia, Argentina, Brazil, Pakistan, Croatia, Norway, Mexico, Morocco, 
South Africa, the Russian Federation, Iran (Islamic Republic of), the Philippines, 
Algeria, Bangladesh, Slovenia, Kuwait, Indonesia, South Africa (on behalf of the 
African Group), Panama, and Benin. 


C-V/6 
page 5 

10. 
AGENDA ITEM NINE - Status of implementation of the Convention 
Submission of declarations 

10.1 
The Conference noted the report by the Director-General on the status of submission 
of initial declarations and notifications as of 11 May 2000 (C-V/DG.8, dated 
12 May 2000). The Conference noted with approbation that its own expressions of 
concern, and those of the Council, had resulted in effective action which meant that, 
as of 11 May 2000, all States Parties had submitted their initial declarations as 
required under the Convention. The Conference encouraged the Director-General to 
give favourable consideration to applying the techniques which had produced such 
good results in this area to other areas in which a significant proportion of States 
Parties were not in fulfilment of the requirements of the Convention. The Conference 
requested the Council to continue to monitor the fulfilment by States Parties of this 
important obligation under the Convention throughout the subsequent period, and to 
report back to it at its next regular session. The delegation of the United States of 
America submitted a national paper on this subject (C-V/NAT.2, dated 18 May 2000). 
Procedures for the handling of confidential information 

10.2 
The Conference noted the report by the Director-General on the implementation of the 
regime governing the handling of confidential information by the Secretariat in 1999 
(C-V/DG.5, dated 8 May 2000). The Conference requested the Council to continue to 
monitor the fulfilment by States Parties of this important obligation under the 
Convention throughout the subsequent period, and to report back to it at its next 
regular session. 
Status of implementation of the requirement for States Parties to provide 
two-year multiple entry/exit visas to inspectors/inspection assistants 

10.3 
The Conference noted the report by the Director-General on the status of 
implementation of the requirement for States Parties to provide two-year multiple 
entry/exit visas to inspectors/inspection assistants (C-V/DG.4, dated 2 May 2000), as 
well as the Note by the Director-General on the availability of visas to inspectors and 
inspection assistants in the case of a challenge inspection or an investigation of 
alleged use (C-V/DG.3, dated 28 April 2000). The Conference requested the Council 
to continue to monitor the fulfilment by States Parties of this important obligation 
under the Convention throughout the subsequent period, and to report back to it at its 
next regular session. 
Legislation, cooperation, and legal assistance 

10.4 
The Conference noted with concern from the relevant information contained in the 
annex to the report by the Director-General on the status of submission of initial 
declarations and notifications, submitted to the Conference at this session, that the 
proportion of States Parties which had fulfilled the requirements of the Convention in 
relation to legislation, cooperation, and assistance had barely increased since the 
Fourth Session of the Conference, and urged all States Parties which had not 

C-V/6 
page 6 

implemented their obligations under Article VII of the Convention, including enacting 
penal legislation with respect to prohibited activities, and informing the Organisation 
of the legislative and administrative measures taken, to do so promptly. The 
Conference requested the Council to continue to monitor the fulfilment by States 
Parties of this important obligation under the Convention throughout the subsequent 
period, and to report back to it at its next regular session. 

10.5 
The Conference considered and adopted the decision on national implementation 
measures (C-V/DEC.20, dated 19 May 2000). 
11. 
AGENDA ITEM TEN - Report of the Organisation on the year 1999 
The Conference considered and approved the “Report of the Organisation on the 
Implementation of the Convention (1 January -31 December 1999)” (C-V/5, dated 
17 May 2000). 

12. 
AGENDA ITEM ELEVEN -Report of the Executive Council on the 
performance of its activities 
12.1 
The Conference noted the “Report of the Executive Council on the Performance of its 
Activities (30 April 1999 -2 April 2000)” (EC-XIX/5 C-V/3, dated 7 April 2000). 
The report was introduced by the outgoing Chairman of the Council, 
Ambassador Ignacio Pichardo Pagaza of Mexico. 
Recommendations of the Council to the Conference 

12.2 
The Conference took the following actions on the basis of recommendations and 
decisions of the Council: 
(a) 
Agreements on the privileges and immunities of the OPCW 
(i) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the negotiated text of the agreement between the 
Government of the Republic of Kenya and the Organisation for the 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the privileges and immunities of 
the OPCW (C-V/DEC.4, dated 17 May 2000). 
(ii) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the negotiated text of the agreement between the 
Government of the Republic of Latvia and the Organisation for the 
Prohibition of Chemical Weapons on the privileges and immunities of 
the OPCW (C-V/DEC.5, dated 17 May 2000). 

C-V/6 
page 7 

(iii) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the negotiated text of the agreement between the 
Government of the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern 
Ireland and the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
on the privileges and immunities of the OPCW (C-V/DEC.6, dated 
17 May 2000). 
(b) 
1986 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between States and 
International Organisations, or between International Organisations 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its 
Sixteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision authorising the 
Director-General, on behalf of the OPCW, to deposit its instrument of 
accession to the 1986 Vienna Convention on the Law of Treaties between 
States and International Organisations, or between International Organisations, 
with the Secretary-General of the United Nations as the Depositary for the 
Convention (C-V/DEC.7, dated 17 May 2000). 

(c) 
Methodology for selecting Schedule 3 plant sites for inspection 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its 
Seventeenth Session, confirmed the Council’s decision on the methodology for 
selecting Schedule 3 plant sites for inspection (EC-XVII/DEC.7, dated 
1 December 1999). 

(d) 
Reports of the External Auditor on the financial statements of the OPCW 
for 1998 and 1999 
(i) 
The Conference noted the audited financial statements of the OPCW 
and the Provident Fund of the OPCW for the period ended 
31 December 1998, and the External Auditor's report and opinion 
thereon (C-V/DG.1, dated 11 November 1999, and Corr.1*, dated 
1 December 1999), including the response of the Director-General to 
the above-mentioned External Auditor’s report. In accordance with 
OPCW Financial Regulation 13.10, these audited financial statements 
and the External Auditor's report and opinion thereon had been 
forwarded to the Conference by the Council at its Seventeenth Session. 
(ii) 
The Conference noted the audited financial statements of the OPCW 
and the Provident Fund of the OPCW for the period ended 
31 December 1999 and the External Auditor's report and opinion 
thereon (C-V/DG.2, dated 5 April 2000, and Corr.1, dated 
9 May 2000), including the response of the Director-General to the 
above-mentioned External Auditor’s report. In accordance with 
OPCW Financial Regulation 13.10, these audited financial statements 
and the External Auditor's report and opinion thereon had been 
forwarded to the Conference by the Council at its Nineteenth Session. 

C-V/6 
page 8 

(e) 
Requests for the use of chemical weapons production facilities for 
purposes not prohibited under the Convention 
(i) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Seventeenth Session, considered and adopted the 
decision approving the request by the Russian Federation to use the 
chemical weapons production facility (mustard gas production facility) 
in Berezniki, for purposes not prohibited under the Convention 
(C-V/DEC.8, dated 17 May 2000). 
(ii) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Seventeenth Session, considered and adopted the 
decision approving the request by the Russian Federation to use the 
chemical weapons production facility (mustard gas production facility) 
in Chapaevsk, for purposes not prohibited under the Convention 
(C-V/DEC.9, dated 17 May 2000). 
(iii) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Seventeenth Session, considered and adopted the 
decision approving the request by the Russian Federation to use the 
chemical weapons production facility (filling mustard gas-lewisite 
mixture into munitions) in Chapaevsk, for purposes not prohibited 
under the Convention (C-V/DEC.10, dated 17 May 2000). 
(iv) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the request by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland to use the chemical weapons production facility, 
ICI Valley, Rhydymwyn, North Wales, for purposes not prohibited 
under the Convention (C-V/DEC.11, dated 17 May 2000). 
(v) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the request by the United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland to use the chemical weapons production facility, 
ICI Randle, Runcorn, Cheshire, for purposes not prohibited under the 
Convention (C-V/DEC.12, dated 17 May 2000). 
(vi) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
approving the request by the Russian Federation to use the chemical 
weapons production facility (DF production), OJSC “Khimprom”, 
Volgograd, for purposes not prohibited under the Convention 
(C-V/DEC.13, dated 17 May 2000). 

C-V/6 
page 9 

(f) 
Request by the Russian Federation to grant an extension of its obligation 
to meet an intermediate deadline for destruction of Category 1 chemical 
weapons stockpiles 
(i) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
on the request by the Russian Federation for an extension of its 
obligation to meet an intermediate deadline for the destruction of one 
percent of its Category 1 chemical weapons stockpiles in accordance 
with paragraph 22 of Part IV(A) of the Verification Annex to the 
Chemical Weapons Convention (C-V/DEC.14, dated 17 May 2000). 
(ii) 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the 
Council at its Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision 
on international financial assistance to the Russian Federation for the 
destruction of its chemical weapons (C-V/DEC.15, dated 
17 May 2000). 
(g) 
Annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight 
The Conference noted that, in accordance with Financial Regulation 12.5, the 
annual report of the Office of Internal Oversight for the period from 1 January 
to 31 December 1999 (attachment to EC-XIX/DG.10, dated 4 April 2000) had 
been submitted to the Council at its Nineteenth Session before it was 
submitted to the Conference, and took cognisance of this annual report. The 
Conference also noted that the Director-General had accepted in full the 
recommendations contained in the report, and that their implementation had 
already been initiated. 

(h) 
Implementation of restrictions on transfers of Schedule 2 and Schedule 3 
chemicals to and from States not party to the Convention 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its 
Nineteenth Session, considered and adopted the decision on the 
implementation of restrictions on transfers of Schedule 2 and Schedule 3 
chemicals to and from States not party to the Convention (C-V/DEC.16, dated 
17 May 2000). 

(i) 
Guidelines regarding low concentration limits for declarations of 
Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its 
Tenth Meeting, considered and adopted the decision on guidelines regarding 
low concentration limits for declarations of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals 
(C-V/DEC.19, dated 19 May 2000). 


C-V/6 
page 10 

(j) Model facility agreement for chemical weapons destruction facilities 
The Conference, in accordance with the recommendation of the Council at its 
Tenth Meeting, considered and adopted the decision on the model facility 
agreement for chemical weapons destruction facilities (C-V/DEC.23, dated 
19 May 2000). 

13. 
AGENDA ITEM TWELVE - Election of members of the Executive Council 
In accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 23 of the Convention, and with Rule 83 of 
the Rules of Procedure of the Conference, the following 21 States Parties were elected 
members of the Council, for a two-year term of office commencing on 12 May 2001: 

Africa: 
Botswana, Cameroon, Nigeria, Sudan, Tunisia 

Asia: 
China, India, Japan, Republic of Korea, Saudi 
Arabia 

Eastern Europe: 
Bulgaria, Croatia 

Latin America and the Caribbean: 
Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, Uruguay 

Western Europe and Other States: 
France, Germany, Italy, United Kingdom of 
Great Britain and Northern Ireland, United 
States of America 

14. 
AGENDA ITEM THIRTEEN - Appointment of the External Auditor 
The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the appointment of the 
External Auditors of the OPCW for the financial years 2000 -2005 (C-V/DEC.24, 
dated 19 May 2000). 

15. 
AGENDA ITEM FOURTEEN -Implementation of Section B of Part IX of the 
Verification Annex 
The Conference referred this issue back to the Council with a view to a 
recommendation being made to the Conference at its Sixth Session. 

16. 
AGENDA ITEM FIFTEEN -Programme and budget of the Organisation, 
submitted by the Executive Council for the ensuing financial period, and all 
items pertaining to this budget 
Programme and budget of the Organisation for 2001 

16.1 
The Conference noted the draft OPCW programme and budget for 2001 (annex to 
C-V/DG/CRP.1*, dated 11 May 2000, and Corr.1, dated 17 May 2000), as well as the 
relevant recommendations of the Council at its Tenth Meeting (subparagraph 3 of 
EC-MX/3*, dated 18 May 2000). The Conference considered and adopted the 
decision on the OPCW programme and budget for 2001 (C-V/DEC.18, dated 
18 May 2000). The Conference noted the statement made by Brazil on behalf of the 

C-V/6 
page 11 

Latin American and Caribbean Group (C-V/NAT.3, dated 18 May 2000). 
The Conference noted the comments made by the Director-General on the draft 2001 
OPCW budget to the Ninth Meeting of the Executive Council on 2 May 2000 
(C-V/DG.15, dated 19 May 2000). 

Draft Medium-Term Plan 

16.2 
In the light of the encouragement offered at its Fourth Session for the Secretariat to 
continue to refine the Draft Medium-Term Plan, the Conference noted that the Draft 
Medium-Term Plan 2001 -2004 (EC-XIX/DEC/CRP.9, dated 3 April 2000), which 
was received by the Council at its Nineteenth Session, will be further considered by 
the Council. 
17. 
AGENDA ITEM SIXTEEN - Scale of assessments to be paid by States Parties 
17.1 
The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the scale of assessments to be 
paid by States Parties for the financial year 2001 (C-V/DEC.25, dated 19 May 2000). 
Status of assessed contributions 

17.2 
The Conference noted the Report by the Director-General on the status of assessed 
contributions as of 30 April 2000 (C-V/DG.9, dated 12 May 2000, and Corr.1, dated 
18 May 2000). The Conference requested the Council to continue to monitor the 
fulfilment by States Parties of this important obligation under the Convention 
throughout the subsequent period, and to report back to it at its next regular session. 
17.3 
The Conference took note of the Note by the Director-General on States Parties in 
arrears in the payment of their financial contributions to the OPCW for the preceding 
two full years, as of 11 May 2000 (C-V/DG.10, dated 12 May 2000). The Conference 
noted that, as of 11 May 2000, the provisions of paragraph 8 of Article VIII of the 
Convention applied to 23 States Parties. The Conference also took note of the Note 
by the Director-General on a request under paragraph 8 of Article VIII of the 
Convention concerning the right to vote (C-V/DG.14, dated 18 May 2000). 
Status of reimbursement of verification costs under Articles IV and V 

17.4 
The Conference noted the Report by the Director-General on the status of 
reimbursement of verification costs under Articles IV or V of the Convention as of 
30 April (C-V/DG.6, dated 9 May 2000). The Conference noted that, notwithstanding 
requests from the Council for those States Parties which were in arrears to reimburse 
the Organisation as soon as possible, very considerable amounts were still in arrears as 
of 30 April 2000, and urged all States Parties in arrears for the reimbursement of such 
invoices to settle their debts as soon as reasonably possible. The Conference 
requested the Council to continue to monitor the fulfilment by States Parties of this 
important obligation under the Convention throughout the subsequent period, and to 
report back to it at its next regular session. 

C-V/6 
page 12 

18. AGENDA ITEM SEVENTEEN -Fostering of international cooperation for 
peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities 
18.1 The Conference noted statements by the following delegations in relation to this 
agenda item: Bangladesh, Iran (Islamic Republic of), Canada, Cuba, and Mexico. The 
Conference also noted the statement by the Director-General on fostering international 
cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities (C-V/DG.13, 
dated 18 May 2000). 
18.2 The Conference referred this issue back to the Council for further consideration, with 
a view to the Council reporting to the Conference at its Sixth Session, and with a view 
to decisions being taken promptly. Many delegations requested that consultations on 
the draft decision be intensified with a view to it being adopted by the Conference at 
its next session. 
19. AGENDA ITEM EIGHTEEN - Ensuring universality of the Convention 
The Conference noted the Report by the Director-General on the implementation of 
the recommendation of the Conference at its Fourth Session on ensuring the 
universality of the Convention (C-V/DG.12, dated 16 May 2000). The Conference 
considered and adopted the recommendation on ensuring the universality of the 
Convention (C-V/DEC.21, dated 19 May 2000). 
20. AGENDA ITEM NINETEEN -Appointment of the Director-General 
20.1 The Conference, noting the decision of the Council at its Tenth Meeting on the 
renewal of the appointment of the Director-General (EC-MX/DEC.2, dated 
18 May 2000), and in accordance with Rule 16 of the Rules of Procedure of the 
Conference, considered and approved the recommendations of the Council and of the 
General Committee to include the appointment of the Director-General in the agenda 
of the Conference, as an additional agenda item. 
20.2 The Conference considered and adopted the decision on the renewal of the 
appointment of the Director-General (C-V/DEC.22, dated 19 May 2000). 
The Conference noted the statement by the Director-General on the renewal of his 
appointment for the second term of office (C-V/DG.16, dated 19 May 2000). 
21. AGENDA ITEM TWENTY - Any other business 
Scientific Advisory Board 
21.1 The Conference took note of the Note by the Director-General concerning the results 
of the expert meeting on the conclusions and recommendations submitted by the 
Scientific Advisory Board in 1999 (EC-XIX/DG.4, dated 14 March 2000). 
Reporting of ricin production 
21.2 The Conference considered and adopted the decision 
production (C-V/DEC.17, dated 18 May 2000). 
on the reporting of ricin 


C-V/6 
page 13 

Authentication and certification procedure for the Central OPCW Analytical 
Database and on-site databases 

21.3 
The Conference, taking note of the Note by the Director-General on the authentication 
and certification procedure for the Central OPCW Analytical Database and on-site 
databases (C-V/DG.7, dated 12 May 2000, and Corr.1, dated 19 May 2000), 
considered the draft decision on this subject (C-V/DEC/CRP.21, dated 12 May 2000). 
The Conference referred this issue back to the Council for further consideration at its 
next regular session, with a view to the Council making a recommendation to the 
Conference at its Sixth Session. 
Guidelines for assessing whether laboratories may retain their designated status 

21.4 
In the context of the request by the Council at its Nineteenth Session for the 
Director-General to prepare and distribute the revised criteria for the retention of 
designation status for deliberation by States Parties as soon as possible, the 
Conference considered the draft decision on guidelines for assessing whether 
laboratories may retain their designated status (C-V/DEC/CRP.17, dated 
11 May 2000). The Conference referred this issue back to the Council for further 
consideration as a priority issue at its next regular session, and mandated the Council 
to take a decision on this issue. 
22. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-ONE -Date and duration of the next regular session 
of the Conference of the States Parties 
The Conference confirmed the decision taken at its Second Session to hold its next 
regular session from 14 - 18 May 2001. 

23. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-TWO - Reports of subsidiary bodies 
Committee of the Whole 

23.1 
The Conference noted the report of the Committee of the Whole on the results of its 
consideration of those agenda items referred to it by the Conference on the 
recommendation of the General Committee (C-V/CoW.1, dated 19 May 2000), and 
took appropriate action as required. 
General Committee 

23.2 
The Conference noted the reports of the General Committee, and took appropriate 
action as required. 
Confidentiality Commission 

23.3 
The Conference noted the report of the fourth meeting of the Confidentiality 
Commission (C-V/CC.1, dated 26 April 2000, and Corr.1, dated 10 May 2000), which 
was introduced by Mr Camilo Sanhueza Bezanilla, the chair of the Confidentiality 
Commission. The Conference approved the request of the Confidentiality 
Commission for authorisation to hold a special session, to be convened exclusively for 
consideration of requests by the Council at its Eighteenth Session in relation to 
confidentiality. 

C-V/6 
page 14 

Credentials Committee 

23.4 
The report of the Credentials Committee (C-V/4, dated 19 May 2000) was presented 
by its Chairman, Ambassador Y.L.M. Zawahir of Sri Lanka. The Chairman orally 
reported that, following the close of the Credentials Committee meeting, formal 
credentials were received for the Representatives of Algeria, Ghana, Luxembourg, 
New Zealand, Nigeria, the Philippines and Suriname, and that an official 
communication was received regarding the representation of Niger. Formal 
credentials will be submitted for the latter in due course. The Conference noted this 
additional information, and approved the report. The Conference also remarked that 
the number of members which failed to submit credentials for their Representatives on 
time in this session was considerably greater than at previous sessions, and urged 
adherence to the requirements of Rule 26 of its Rules of Procedure for its next session. 
Under that rule, the Director-General should receive the credentials preferably one 
week in advance of the session. 
24. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-THREE -Adoption of the report of the Conference 
of the States Parties 
The Conference considered and adopted the report of its Fifth Session. 

25. 
AGENDA ITEM TWENTY-FOUR - Closure 
The Chairman closed the Fifth Session at 18:15 on 19 May 2000. 

- - - o - - 



