OPCW Conference of the States Parties 


Fourth Session  C-IV/NAT.14  
28 June - 2 July 1999  26 October 1999  
ENGLISH only  

CANADA 
INTER-AMERICAN SUPPORT FOR THE CONVENTION ON 
THE PROHIBITION OF THE DEVELOPMENT, PRODUCTION, STOCKPILING 
AND USE OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS AND ON THEIR DESTRUCTION 

The Ambassador of Canada, H.E. Madam Marie Bernard-Meunier, requested that the attached document be circulated to Member States. 
Annex:  (in English, French and Spanish only) 

Resolution of the First Plenary Session of Inter-American Support for the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction 
CS-1999-1561 
C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 2 

Annex 
C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 3 C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 4 
C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 5 C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 6 
C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 7 C-IV/NAT.14 Annex page 8 

 - - - o - - ­


OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 


Fourth Session 	C-IV/NAT.1 
28 June - 2 July 1999 16 March 1999 Original: ENGLISH 
SWEDISH REVIEW UNDER THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
PARAGRAPH 2(e) OF ARTICLE XI 

Introduction 
1. 	Within the framework of her implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling, and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction (CWC), Sweden has undertaken a review, under paragraph 2(e) of Article XI, of its existing national regulations in the field of trade in chemicals in order to ascertain their consistency with the object and purpose of the Convention.  Sweden wishes to inform the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) of the review undertaken. 
The object and purpose of the Convention are set out in Article I. For the provisions laid down in this Article, the Convention has set up a complex confidence-building verification system of declarations, notifications, reporting and on-site inspections. These elements are further elaborated in the annexes of the Convention. Sweden has fulfilled her obligations with regard to the required declarations, has so far received three on-site inspections, has contributed to the voluntary fund under paragraph 7(a) of Article X and has met her financial obligations in full and on time. Sweden has also informed the OPCW, in accordance with paragraph 5 of Article VII, of the legal and administrative measures taken to implement the Convention, and will, under that Article, continue to do so if any amendments or changes so require. 
With regard to trade in chemicals, the obligations that States Parties have undertaken, are laid down in paragraph 1(a) of Article I and paragraph 1(d) of Article I, which stipulate that each State Party undertakes never under any circumstances to transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone; and never under any circumstances to assist, encourage or induce, in any way, anyone to engage in any activity prohibited to a State Party under the Convention. This essential obligation requires States Parties to have export regulations in place designed to ensure that the purpose of that provision is achieved. The review undertaken by Sweden in accordance with paragraph 2(e) of Article XI has served the purpose to examine to what extent her existing national export regulations are consistent with these requirements.  As a result of this review, Sweden wishes to inform the States Parties 
CS-1999-1132 
C-IV/NAT.1 page 2 
of the export regulations that are now in place. Being essential to meet Sweden's obligations under paragraphs 1(a) and 1(d) of Article I, these regulations also constitute a base for unimpeded trade in chemicals for purposes not prohibited under the Convention. 

Scope of export control 
2. 	The export regulations on trade in chemicals applied by Sweden, as a member of the European Union, are consistent with the EC Regulation 3381/94 and the guidelines in Annex III to Council Decision 94/942/CFSP. An export authorisation is required for all exports to destinations outside the European Community. A statement of end-use may be required. Following the review, Sweden will not automatically require the prior submission of an end-use/user statement in connection with an application for export authorisation for export of a Schedule 2 or 3 chemical to a State Party.  However, Sweden will retain the right to request additional documentation to support such an application. With regard to exports of Schedule 1 chemicals, national rules complementing the EU regulations are included in the regulation on military equipment. Exports of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals are governed by the EC Regulation 3381/98 and by the Swedish regulation on strategic goods. Legislation with regard to the obligation to allow exports of Schedule 2 chemicals to other States Parties only, is included in the latter regulation and will come into effect three years after entry into force of the Convention. 

Scope for import control 
3. 	The CWC requirement to provide 30 days advance notification to the OPCW of imports of Schedule 1 chemicals is part of the regulation on military equipment.  
Legislation with regard to the obligation to allow imports of Schedule 2 chemicals from other States Parties only, is part of the regulation on strategic goods, and will come into effect three years after entry into force of the CWC. 

Organisation 
4. 	The procedures for export and import licensing is administered by the National Inspectorate of Strategic Products, which also is designated the National Authority to the CWC.     

Support to other States Parties 
5. 	In accordance with paragraph 5 of Article VII a State Party shall inform the OPCW of the legislative and administrative measures taken to implement the CWC. In Sweden's view, the obligations undertaken by the States Parties under Article I require them to include appropriate export regulations among those measures. Sweden is ready, under the provision of paragraph 2 of Article VII, to support interested States Parties in this work, building upon its own experience in working out the legislation required,  implementation modalities for it and necessary administrative measures.   
C-IV/NAT.1 page 3 
- - - o - - ­


OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 


Fourth Session C-IV/NAT.2 28 June - 2 July 1999 29 April 1999 Original: ENGLISH 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 
EXPORT CONTROLS AND THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
1. 	Background 
1.1 	Certain Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) States Parties object to the application of national export controls on trade in chemicals and are pushing to undercut or abolish informal nonproliferation groups, claiming that chemical export controls hamper economic and technological development in the chemical field in developing countries. 
1.2 	The United States disagrees that national chemical nonproliferation export controls and informal nonproliferation groups hamper legitimate economic or technological development. National export controls aimed at critical precursor chemicals and key items of chemical equipment provide a mechanism for governments to review exports and deny such items to proliferation programs. Such controls also inform industry what items and technology should be handled particularly carefully to prevent diversion to CW purposes. Furthermore, export controls are envisaged in the CWC, Article I, which states that States Parties will neither "transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone" nor "assist, encourage or induce" anyone to engage in prohibited activities. 
1.3 	
National chemical nonproliferation export controls do not restrict legitimate trade and, as noted above, they are integral to States Parties' Article I obligations. Nothing in the CWC obligates the United States or any other State Party to accept any modification, change in scope, or weakening of such national export controls. Informal nonproliferation groups allow countries to share experiences in implementing and enforcing national export nonproliferation and export control measures. 

2. 	
Export Controls, International Cooperation, and the CWC 


2.1 	CWC Article I states that States Parties will neither "develop, produce, otherwise acquire, stockpile or retain chemical weapons or transfer, directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone" nor "assist, encourage or induce" anyone to engage in prohibited activities. 
CS-1999-1219 
C-IV/NAT.2 page 2 
2.2 	Article VII, paragraph 1, requires that each State Party "adopt the necessary measures to implement its obligations under this Convention" (including Article I). 
2.3 	National chemical nonproliferation export controls and multilateral nonproliferation groups support Articles I and VII, as well as the object and purpose of the CWC by: 
a) 	providing a review mechanism to help governments prevent chemicals and materials from being used for purposes prohibited by the CWC; 
b) 	providing a means of implementing Article I and prohibiting persons from undertaking prohibited activity with respect to such chemicals and materials; 
c) 	making chemical exporters aware of their nonproliferation responsibilities and thus less likely to engage in a transfer to a CW program; and 
d) 	providing a means to deal with transfers to terrorist-related entities. 
2.4 	CWC Article XI states that the CWC "shall be implemented in a manner which avoids hampering the economic or technological development of States Parties, and international cooperation in the field of chemical activities for purposes not prohibited under this Convention including the international exchange of scientific and technical information and chemicals and equipment for the production, processing or use of chemicals for purposes not prohibited under this Convention..." 
2.5 	National chemical nonproliferation export controls do no violate Article XI because: 
a) 	export controls and other such "necessary measures" are envisaged in Article I and Article VII; 
b) 	they only impede export or diversion of materials to CW programs and do not constitute a ban or embargo; and 
c) 	they do not hamper the trade of goods for legitimate purposes of harm legitimate industry, including in the developing world. 
3. 	U.S. CW Export Controls 
The United States' national chemical nonproliferation export controls require exporters to obtain a license for exports of key items of chemical production equipment if the items are destined to any of 36 countries in regions of tension.  Exports of 54 controlled chemicals require a U.S. export license for most countries.  The United States also controls the precursor chemicals and agents listed on the CWC schedules according to the trade restrictions mandated in the CWC. Finally, the United States has "catch-all" controls that provide a legal basis to control any individual export if that export is destined for a CW program anywhere in the world. 
C-IV/NAT.2 page 3 
4. 	Effect of National Chemical Nonproliferation Export Controls on Legitimate Trade 
National CW export controls do not hamper the trade of goods for legitimate purposes or hamper legitimate industry, including in the developing world. This is clearly and objectively demonstrable using, for example, an analysis or applications to the United States for the export of 54 controlled precursor chemicals and key items of chemical equipment. In 1998, the U.S. required a license for only 1.5 percent of its $65.5 billion worth of chemical exports. Specifically, in 1998, the U.S. received 824 applications to export chemical materials valued at $987 million. Of these applications, the U.S. denied two --or 0.24 percent --valued at $420,000. In other words, the percentage of total dollar value or controlled chemical goods not allowed to be exported in 1998 was 0.05 percent. This, in turn, was only 0.000064 percent of the total U.S. chemical goods exported in 1998. Similarly, from 1995-1998, the U.S. rejected 21 (worth $13.5 million) out of 3722 (worth $3.28 billion) chemical license applications, or 0.5 percent. These rejections comprised only 0.4 percent of the total dollar value of all applications to export controlled chemical goods. 
5. 	Conclusion 
National chemical nonproliferation export controls and informal nonproliferation groups make it more difficult for proliferators and terrorists to acquire materials for CW programs. Such controls and groups do not hinder peaceful legitimate trade.  Both national chemical export controls and informal nonproliferation groups are fully supportive of and consistent with the obligations, object, and purpose of the CWC.  The United States continues to fully support national export controls and informal nonproliferation groups. 
- - - o - - ­
OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 


Fourth Session 	C-IV/NAT.4 
28 June - 2 July 1999 15 June 1999 Original: ENGLISH 
CANADIAN REVIEW UNDER ARTICLE Xl PARAGRAPH 2 (e) 
CANADA'S EXPORT AND IMPORT CONTROLS 
ON CWC CHEMICALS AND PRECURSORS 

1. 	Introduction 
1.1 	In December 1997, Canada submitted a paper (C-II/NAT.1) describing its Export and Import controls for CWC chemicals. This followed a Canadian review, pursuant to Article Xl 2 (e), to render such controls consistent with the object and purpose of the Convention. 
1.2 	The paper now being re-submitted reflects minor changes to the original paper, due to the implementation in Canada of two General Export Permits (GEP) and a General Import Permit (GIP) covering the export and import of CWC Toxic Chemicals and Precursors. 
1.3 	To fulfill the obligations in Article I of the Convention, particularly Article 1 (d), Canada has determined that it is necessary to require Export and Import Permits for all CWC Scheduled chemicals to and from all States, with no quantity thresholds. Canada believes that other States Parties cannot meet these obligations without adopting similar regulations, in order to be able to comply with the provisions of this Article. 
1.4 	
Canada has contributed to assisting other States Parties, particularly from developing countries, to be better equipped to meet these obligations of the Convention, through providing experts and funding for seminars. 

2. 	
Export Controls 


2.1 	Canada requires an export permit for the export, to any destination, of any chemical on the three Schedules of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). 
2.2 	In the case of Schedule 1 chemicals, Canada's regulations specify that such chemicals are subject to Individual Export Permits, may only be exported to CWC States Parties and may not be re-exported to any third State. 
CS-1999-1289 
C-IV/NAT.4 page 2 
3. 	Mixtures 
The export of a mixture containing any amount of a Schedule 1 chemical is also subject to an individual export permit. The export of a mixture containing any amount of a Schedule 2 or of a Schedule 3 chemical requires an export permit. In the absence of clear OPCW guidelines for the declaration of mixtures, Canadian regulations have been established. Mixtures that contain less than 10% (by weight) of any Schedule 2 chemical or less than 25% (by weight) of any Schedule 3 chemical are subject to a General Export Permit. Mixtures that contain 10% or more (by weight) of any Schedule 2 chemical or 25% or more (by weight) of any Schedule 3 chemical are subject to an Individual Export Permit. 
4. 	End-use certificate 
4.1 	Canada does not require the prior submission of an end-use certificate for the export of any Scheduled chemical to a State Party, although we retain the right to request additional documentation to support an application for an export permit for any Scheduled chemical. This is in keeping with our obligation under Article 1 of the Convention to ensure that we do not assist, encourage or induce, in any way, anyone to engage in any activity prohibited to a State Party under the Convention. 
4.2 	
The export of any Schedule 2 or 3 chemical to a recipient State not party to the CWC requires an end-use certificate. Exports of any Schedule 2 or 3 chemicals or their mixtures to the United States are subject to a General Export Permit. 

5. 	
Import Controls 


5.1 	Canada requires an import permit for the import, from any State, of any chemical on the three Schedules of the CWC. 
5.2 	Schedule 1 chemicals alone or in a mixture are subject to Individual Import Permits. Such chemicals may only be imported from CWC States Parties and may not be re­exported to any third State. 
5.3 	Schedule 2 or 3 chemicals alone or in mixtures are subject to a General Import Permit. 
- - - o - - ­
OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 


Fourth Session 	C-IV/NAT.5 
28 June - 2 July 1999 17 June 1999 Original: ENGLISH 
AUSTRALIA 

CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC) IMPLEMENTATION 

ADJUSTMENT OF AUSTRALIAN EXPORT AND IMPORT LICENSING 
MEASURES 

1. 	Overview 
1.1 	The regulatory and administrative procedures described in this paper have been undertaken to ensure that Australia satisfies its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC), including the requirement set out in Article XI 2(e), to review existing regulations in the field of trade in chemicals in order to render them consistent with the object and purpose of the Convention. Australia has implemented the necessary procedures to meet requirements related to international trade in scheduled chemicals under the CWC, and keeps its implementation obligations under continual review.  
1.2 	Australia’s practice on export controls is non-discriminatory: licences for controlled chemicals are required for exports to all destinations, including CWC States Parties. 
1.3 	
The Chemical Weapons (Prohibition) Act 1994 is Australia’s principal implementing legislation for the CWC. CWC obligations on monitoring/regulating international trade in chemicals have been implemented through amendments to the pre-existing Customs Act 1901.  Further details on the legislative procedures are set out below. 

2. 	
Export licensing 


2.1 	In order to implement Convention obligations, Australia has required individual licences since December 1996 for exports to all destinations of chemicals on the CWC schedules. These measures operate universally and on a non-discriminatory basis: licences are required for all destinations, including CWC States Parties. The Strategic Trade Policy and Operations Section of the Department of Defence administers export licences for chemicals, as well as other military and dual-use goods.  
2.2 	Requirements have been included in the Customs (Prohibited Exports) Regulations (Section 13E) and administrative guidelines to implement the following requirements in the CWC’s Verification Annex (VA): 
CS-1999-1296 
C-IV/NAT.5 page 2 
2.3 	Schedule 1 
a. 
Exports of Schedule 1 chemicals are only permitted to other States Parties to the CWC (VA Part VI para 3).   

b. 
Re-exports of Schedule 1 chemicals are prohibited (VA Part VI para 4). 

c. 
37 days advance notification of an export must be given (VA Part VI para 5 requires 30 days notification to the Technical Secretariat). (Although Convention requirements are for 30 days notice, Australian regulations require 37 days notice to ensure sufficient domestic processing time.) 


2.4 	Schedule 2 
End-use certificates must be obtained for exports of Schedule 2 chemicals to non-States Parties (VA Part VII para 32). 
2.5 	Schedule 3 
End-use certificates must be obtained for exports of Schedule 3 chemicals to non-States Parties (VA Part VIII para 26). 
3. 	Import Licensing 
3.1 	Requirements have been included in the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations (Section 5J) to implement the following requirements in the CWC’s Verification Annex: 
3.2 	Schedule 1 
(i) 	
The requirement to provide 30 days advance notification of plans to import a Schedule 1 chemical has been implemented as part of the new Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations (pursuant to VA Part VI para 5). (Although Convention requirements are for 30 days notice, the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations require 37 days notice to ensure sufficient domestic processing time.) The Regulation creates a requirement for licences for such imports. Imports from non-States Parties are specifically prohibited under the Regulations pursuant to VA Part VI para 3.   

(ii) 	
These procedures are administered by Australia’s national authority for the CWC -the CWC Office (CWCO) -which is a separate unit within the Foreign Affairs and Trade portfolio.  


3.3 	Schedule 2 
(i) 	
While imports of Schedule 2 chemicals do not presently require licences, the process of amending the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations has commenced which will allow such imports only from other States Parties after April 2000 (Part VII para 31). The proposed amendments will, in effect, establish an open-ended licence system for the import of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals. 

C-IV/NAT.5 page 3 

(ii) 	
The requirement to provide declarations to the OPCW of aggregate national figures for imports of Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals is currently being implemented through industry surveys. However the proposed amendments to Section 5J of the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations, will enable the Government to more accurately monitor the import of Schedule 2 chemicals, and to move away from a survey-based system. 


3.4 	Schedule 3 
Import licences are not currently required for Schedule 3 chemicals. Trade data on imports of these chemicals is collected through extensive industry surveys. The proposed amendments to the Customs (Prohibited Imports) Regulations (as outlined above) to establish an open-ended licence system will reduce the burden on industry and will provide a framework for amendments to import licensing of Schedule 3 chemicals if such steps are required pursuant to a decision of the Conference of States Parties.   
4. 	Trade in other chemicals 
4.1 	The Article I obligations of the CWC require States Parties to undertake never, under any circumstances, to transfer chemical weapons to anyone or to assist, encourage or induce, in any way, anyone to engage in any activity prohibited to a State Party. 
4.2 	A wide variety of chemicals has been sought for CW proliferation purposes.  Australia requires individual licences under the Customs (Prohibited Export) Regulations on a number of other chemicals not listed in the CWC schedules which pose a proliferation risk. These measures also operate universally and on a non­discriminatory basis: licences are required for exports to all destinations, including CWC States Parties.   
4.3 	It is not possible to identify and describe, for regulatory purposes, all other chemicals that might be used in a CW program. Also, in cases where dual-use chemicals have widespread commercial application, it would be impractical to include them in regulations (if included in regulations, all exports of these items would require a licence, which would create an unnecessary administrative burden on the licensing authority as well as for industry). 
4.4 	The Weapons of Mass Destruction (Prevention of Proliferation) Act 1994 addresses the Article I obligation with respect to chemicals not included under the Customs Act (1901). The WMD Act provides the Government with the authority to prevent the export of items to destinations considered to pose an unacceptable CW proliferation risk: it prohibits the export of goods and services which will or may be used in a WMD program. It provides for prosecution in circumstances where the person concerned knew or suspected the goods or services were to be used in a program of concern.   
- - - o - - ­
C-IV/NAT.5 page 4 


