STATEMENT 
TO THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF  
THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES TO  
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

BY 

H.E. MR STEPHEN BRADY 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF AUSTRALIA TO THE 
OPCW 

THE HAGUE, 5 December 2006 

(check against delivery) 

2 

Mr Chairman 
Let me join other speakers in congratulating you on your election as Chairman of the Conference of States Parties.  I wish you and your fellow office holders every success in your stewardship of the Conference and for the year ahead. I am confident that your diplomatic skills will enable us to achieve a successful outcome to this session and I pledge the full support of the Australian delegation to assist you in your work. 
Mr Chairman 
Australia is steadfastly committed to the object and purpose of the Chemical Weapons Convention because of its critical contribution to international peace and security. The highest goal of the Convention is undoubtedly disarmament through the verifiable elimination of all existing chemical weapons.  Regretfully, progress towards achievement of this goal is slower than was originally anticipated and requires intensified effort by chemical weapons (CW) possessor states in the lead­up to the final destruction deadline of 2012.   
Universality of the Convention and full adherence to all of its provisions contribute to international non-proliferation efforts to prevent new chemical weapons from being developed or acquired by state and non­state actors. We welcome further progress made this year under the two action plans on universality and Article VII implementation.  The universality action plan has been especially successful, with Montenegro becoming the 181st state to join the Convention on 23 October.  Similarly, we are pleased that nearly all of the countries of the Asia-Pacific region have joined the Convention. 
Like a number of other countries, Australia has collaborated with the Technical Secretariat in assisting regional states parties to obtain the means necessary to meet their Article VI and VII obligations under the Convention. The CWC workshop held in Phnom Penh last year - organised jointly by Cambodia, Australia, Japan and the OPCW is a good example of the effectiveness of joint efforts to improve compliance.  Australia, Japan and Indonesia are together planning a workshop in Jakarta scheduled for February next year designed to focus on practical aspects of implementing the Chemical Weapons Convention and the role of industry. 
While the action plans have focused on strengthening the Convention, its object and purpose can be further reinforced by other measures that are 
3 

entirely consistent with the Convention's provisions.  UN Security Council Resolution 1540 significantly strengthens measures for preventing proliferators obtaining materials for the production of WMD with its requirement for effective national export and transhipment controls. Effective export controls are a key element in supporting the non-proliferation objectives of the CWC without hampering legitimate trade and technology transfers for the peaceful uses of chemistry. 
Mr Chairman 
Australia is concerned about the possibility of terrorists acquiring and using chemicals for hostile purposes.  We accordingly welcome France's constructive efforts in the Counter-Terrorism Working Group and intend to continue to work cooperatively with States Parties and the Technical Secretariat to address the threat of chemical terrorism. 
Mr Chairman 
Turning our attention to the Conference’s agenda, we believe we have the opportunity here to strengthen further the implementation of the CWC regime. 
Australia has in the past agreed to requests for extensions of deadlines for the destruction of Category 1 chemical weapons stockpiles, based on the provision of comprehensive CW destruction plans and the practical circumstances prevailing in each case.  At this Conference, we shall similarly agree to extension requests that are before us for decision.  However, we emphasise the need for all approved extensions to be predicated on effective management of the destruction process and high levels of international transparency and local security.  We strongly urge all CW possessor states to work assiduously in meeting their agreed destruction deadlines. 
Given the significance and proximity of the 2012 final destruction deadline established in the Convention, and the serious obligations of possessor states, Australia strongly supports the confidence-building measure of periodic Executive Council visits to chemical weapons destruction facilities in order to monitor progress and increase transparency. 
4 

Mr Chairman 
Australia recognises the importance of the work being undertaken in the industry cluster process.  We are disappointed by the collapse of negotiations on the draft decision regarding low concentration declarations thresholds for Part A Schedule 2 chemicals.  We urge states parties to resume discussions on this long-debated issue in recognition of the risk that these production facilities pose to the object and purpose of the Convention. 
To demonstrate tangibly Australia’s support for a low concentration threshold, we have recently amended the CWC regulations in Australia to apply a permit threshold of 0.5 per cent to producers and users of all three Part A Schedule 2 chemicals.   
We hope that agreement will soon be reached on an improved methodology for the selection of other chemical production facilities (OCPFs) for inspection.  We also look forward to agreement in the coming year on measures to address the problem of late declarations and to reduce transfer discrepancies. 
Mr Chairman 
Each year, the Conference has the essential task of considering and adopting the Organisation’s program and budget for the next twelve­month period.  We welcome the Technical Secretariat’s draft budget for 2007 – the second zero-nominal-growth budget in a row, which also provides for new initiatives. This proposed budget relies on states parties meeting their financial contributions in full and on time.  Needless to say, Australia strongly urges all member states to do so. 
Mr Chairman 
The second review conference of the Convention, scheduled for April 2008 provides the opportunity for policy making organs to address the following important issues,  
• 	
the timely destruction of all chemical weapons; 

• 	
strategies and incentives to achieve full universality; 

• 	
improving the timeliness, quality and accuracy of Article VI 
declarations so as to enhance transparency and fairness in 
allocation of inspection load; 


• 	
resolving the causes of discrepancies between trade declarations; 

• 	
promoting best practice in tracking trade of chemicals listed under the Convention, including through the adoption of the World Customs Organisation Harmonized System of Codes;  

• 	
enhancing the role of the OPCW to assist States Parties to reduce the risks of chemical terrorism, within the scope of its non­proliferation mandate; and 

• 	
encouraging the fullest development of the OPCW Technical Secretariat as a professional, motivated and cohesive organisation. 


5 

I would like to extend Australia’s support to Ambassador Parker of the United Kingdom in his capacity as chairman of the open-ended working group for the second review conference. We will make every effort to contribute to the preparations to ensure its success. 
Mr Chairman 
As we approach the 10-year anniversary of the Convention, we contemplate the effect of chemical warfare on many unsuspecting victims whilst also commemorating the success of the Convention as an effective multilateral instrument in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation.  The achievements of the Convention to date are due to a number of factors, including the ongoing efforts of the Director General and the highly competent and professional staff of the Technical Secretariat.  
In addition, recent years have seen strengthened cooperation and pooling of resources between the OPCW and states parties, as evidenced by the provision of assistance to requesting countries and in the development of improved procedures and methods for the conduct of on-site verification activities. The commitment, support and initiative of these stakeholders should be commended and continuity into the future should be encouraged. 
Australia looks forward to further close cooperation with the Technical Secretariat and other states parties in the coming year as we continue our term on the Executive Council. 
Thank you very much Mr Chairman. 
Check against delivery 
STATEMENT 
BY 
H.E. MR. KAMIL KHASIYEV 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE 
OF THE REPUBLIC OF AZERBAIJAN 
TOOPCW 
HEAD OF THE DELEGATION 
ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE 
OF THE STATE PARTIES TO ewc 

THE HAGUE, 6 DECEMBER 2006 
Mr. Chairman. 
Mr. Directory-General. 
Distinguished delegates. 

Let me join other speakers in warmly congratulating you on election as the Chairman of the Eleventh session of the Conference of the State Parties and wish you every success in all endeavors. I am confident that your diplomatic skills will enable us to achieve a successful outcome of this session and I pledge full support of the delegation of Azerbaijan in this regard. 
It is also a great pleasure for us to extend our greetings to OPCW Director-General Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter and express gratitude to him and the Technical Secretariat staff for their continuous efforts in ensuring strict compliance with the Convention, promoting its universality, assisting OPCW members with national implementation and raising awareness of the crucial role of chemical disarmament and non­proliferation in the international security. The Conference is always an excellent occasion for us to review and assess what we have accomplished in the previous year and. perhaps more importantly. it is an opportunity to set priorities for the year to come and beyond. 
Mr. Chairman. 
International disarmament. arms control and non-proliferation are inseparably linked with international security. The Republic of Azerbaijan regards this area of international cooperation as one of the priorities of its foreign and security policy viewing full elimination of all types ofWMD as the ultimate goal of the disarmament process. In this regard the Chemical Weapons Convention which is the first international legal instrument for complete prohibition and destruction of the whole category of weapons of mass destruction under a strict verification regime represents a huge step fOlWard in the direction of a WMD­free world. Upholding the authority of the CWC and ensuring effective implementation acquire great significance in maintaining global security and stability. 
Promotion of the universality of the Convention has always been and will remain the key task that the Organization has to fulfil!. There has been tangible progress in this regard over the recent years. Hopefully. this positive trend will continue in the future since comprehensive implementation and effectiveness of the Convention depend greatly on universal participation by all states. 
Mr. Chairman. 
Azerbaijan is located in a very sensitive region with a number of unresolved inter ~ and intra-state conflicts. that resulted in the emergence of "grey" areas which are beyond the control of the legitimate authorities. The gec-strategic situation of Azerbaijan at the cross-roads between the East and the West as well as the North and the South turns it into an important transportation hub. Due to these factors we pay particular attention to prevention of all kinds of illegal trafficking including the dual-use goods. components and materials. which can be used in production of weapons of mass destruction or means of their delivery. Significant progress has also been made in further improving export control system, including elaboration of a relevant legislative basis which is in conformity with the international standards as well in enhancing capacity ofborder and customs control services. 
Given growing terrorist activities in various pans of the world. the threat of the "chemical terrorism" should not be underestimated. Relatively cheap cost of chemicals and easy access to relevant information in the epoch of globalization and Internet make the task of prevention of and preparedness for this type of terror topical enough. While a leading role in combating terrorism belongs to the UN and its CTC. there might be a need to take a fresh look at how the expertise of this Organization could be better employed in this area. 
Having said that nevertheless. we continue to believe that a strict compliance with the Convention and its universality offer the most effective defense against terrorists gaining access to chemical weapons and hazardous substances. 
Mr. Chairman, 
National implementation measures represent not only obligations of the State Parties but are a necessary precondition to ensure full. smooth and effective implementation of the Convention. In the past years State Parties and the Technical Secretariat have put efforts into the implementation of the Action Plan, and provided assistance ~y holding seminars. extending fmancial support and expert advice. In this regard we highly appreciate the efforts of the Technical Secretariat in facilitating implementation of Article VII of the Convention. During the past period the Republic of Azerbaijan has made an important progress in implementation of its Article vn obligations. With the help of the Technical Secretariat first draft of the national legislation was prepared. In our drafting efforts, we have been oriented towards a contemporary and comprehensive legislation that fully corresponds with the aims and provisions of the Convention. Currently, the draft Law on the implementation of the Convention is undergoing relevant parliamentary procedures to be passed in due course. 
As a country with rich potential for development of chemical industry and chemistry-related sciences Azerbaijan is interested in benefiting from numerous assistance programs run by the Organization. Azerbaijan also attaches importance to international cooperation in the field of peaceful uses of chemistry, which would contribute to sustainable economic development of the State Parties with economies in transition. In this regard we look forward to our fruitful cooperation with the OPCW and assistance of the StateParties in the spirit ofArticleXI oftheConvention. 
Mr. Chairman, 
In conclusion, I wish to express our sincere hope that current Conference will equip us with the required means to find effective solutions for the remaining issues in order to increase the efficiency of the ewe implementation process which is to the interest ofus -all. 
Thank you. 
ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES OF 
THE ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

5-8 December, 2006, The Hague, The Netherlands 

STATEMENT BY 
AMBASSADOR FUAD ŠABETA 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA TO THE 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

The Netherlands, The Hague, 5 December 2006 
1 

Mr. Chairman, 
First of all, allow me to congratulate you, on behalf of BH Delegation, on your appointment for the Chairman of this Conference. I am confident that you will guide us through this event in an excellent way and I can assure you of our full support in fulfilling this important task. I would also like to express our sincere appreciation to your predecessor, Ambassador of Peru, Mr. Jose Antonio Arrospide, for his excellent work. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Director-General, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
During 2006, Bosnia and Herzegovina has made a considerable progress in the process of implementation of the provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  
One of the major achievements was certainly the adoption of the Law on Implementation of the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and their Destruction, by the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on February 21, 2006. 
In addition, the Parliamentary Assembly of Bosnia and Herzegovina has adopted the Law on Amendments to the Criminal Code of Bosnia and Herzegovina. Its text was published in the Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina No. 55/06 from July 18, 2006, and the Law entered into force on July 26, 2006. 
In accordance with the obligation from the Article VII, paragraph 5. of the CWC, the full text of both documents has been submitted to the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW. 
These two very comprehensive laws, which cover all fields stipulated by the Convention, enables Bosnia and Herzegovina to fully meet all its obligations from the CWC.   
Allow me to take this opportunity to thank once more to the Technical Secretariat for their substantive support. In particular, I would like to extend our gratitude to the Legal Branch experts for their constructive and professional assistance provided to my country. 
With regard to the Article X of the CWC, I would like to inform you that the Council of Ministers of Bosnia and Herzegovina, on its session held on May 25, 2006, has adopted the Program on Protection against Chemical Weapons and on Response in a Case of an 
2 

Accident and Incident in which Chemicals are involved. The Program was published in the Official Gazette of Bosnia and Herzegovina No. 80/06 from October 10, 2006.  
Mr. Chairman, 
Since our last Conference, the Technical Secretariat of OPCW has continued its vigorous efforts to accomplish the many tasks relevant to its mission, especially in the area of promotion of the principle of universality. The accession of the new member states gives renewed relevance and purpose to both the Convention and the OPCW. We welcome all these States and hope that we will have all remaining nations as full-fledged members of the CWC as soon as possible. 
We attach great importance to the implementation of the Action Plan regarding the Article VII obligations and we hope that each country makes its utmost efforts to implement all its provisions. Enacting effective national legislation under the CWC, in all member states, would not just allow prosecution of offenders, it would send a strong message that our governments are not only committed to meeting our treaty obligations, but also to stopping a clear threat to global security. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina commends adoption of multi-year payment plans as a mechanism to encourage States Parties that are in arrears to regularize the payment of their outstanding annual contributions to the OPCW. 
We hope that the Conference will be in position to adopt Programme and Budget for 2007, which is very important for the future effective work of the OPCW. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina, as a non-possessor state, encourages all possessor states to increase their efforts to speed up the process of destruction of chemical weapons and to complete it within deadlines set out by the Convention. In this regard, we advocate the proposed periodic visits by members of the Executive Council of the OPCW to destruction facilities and capitals in those States Parties proposing 2012 as the final deadline for the destruction of their stockpiles. 
Bosnia and Herzegovina welcomes the adoption of the UN Resolution UN"Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy"(September 8, 2006) in which the OPCW and the International Atomic Energy Agency, are encouraged to continue their efforts, within their respective mandates, in helping States to build capacity to prevent terrorist from accessing nuclear, chemical and radiological materials, to ensure security at related facilities and to respond effectively in the event of an attack using such materials. This is very positive confirmation the OPCW's role in global anti-terrorist efforts. 
In conclusion, I would like to reiterate the commitment of Bosnia and Herzegovina to the aims and objectives of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
I thank you for giving me opportunity to address you. 
3 

STATEMENT OF CANADA 

ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

DELIVERED BY 
H.E. AMBASSADOR JIM WALL 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA 
TO THE 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

The Hague 
December 5, 2006 
(CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY) 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates and Honoured Guests: 
I wish first, Mr. Chairman, to congratulate you on your election to your important office. Many participants in this forum witnessed the effective exercise of your considerable diplomatic skills during your recent Chairmanship of the Executive Council (EC).  I know this Conference will benefit from your experience and talent.  You can count on the full cooperation and support of the Canadian Delegation. 
Canada continues to attach high importance to full and effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, which remains unique in its provision for a verified, comprehensive ban on an entire category of weapons of mass destruction.  We attach special value to the work of the OPCW at a time when the importance and efficacy of multilateral arms control and disarmament agreements have in various quarters been called into doubt.  As we approach the Tenth Anniversary of the entry-into-force of the Convention, there are grounds for both satisfaction and unease. 
One specific cause for optimism is the impressive growth in our membership, including over the course of the past year.  There are now 181 States Parties, exceeding the goal we set for ourselves at the last Conference. There nevertheless remain disturbing gaps in our membership and we should sustain our collective efforts to move ever closer to universality of adherence. 
Effective CWC implementation cannot be a matter simply of numbers; qualitative aspects of Convention implementation are crucially important. There are two main dimensions to this.  First, each State Party must take timely and effective actions to comply with its obligations under the Convention. Second, there needs to be a well­managed and well-staffed Technical Secretariat which receives clear policy direction from the policy-making organs of the OPCW. 
The obligation of chemical weapons possessors to declare and verifiably destroy all their chemical weapons stockpiles within specified time periods is a central provision of the Convention.  All six declared chemical weapons possessors, through their declarations and their actions to initiate and implement verified CW destruction programs in cooperation with the Organisation, have convincingly demonstrated their bona fide intentions to meet their destruction obligations. Among the early-declared smaller possessors, there has been reassuring progress in the implementation of their CW destruction programs. In the two main possessor State Parties, destruction activities have proceeded apace in the past year.  A notable acceleration of destruction activities in the Russian Federation is to be welcomed. However, the fact that, almost ten years after EIF, only about 20% of declared CW stockpiles have been destroyed is not reassuring. The requests of each of the two main possessors for a maximum extension of their final destruction deadlines to April 2012, has understandably and properly elicited a sense of concern among Executive Council members.  Canada would welcome positive Council recommendations on the extension requests, while also making provision for visits by EC delegations to CW destruction sites as a transparency measure. 
Of course all States Parties, not just CW possessors, have important operational obligations under the CWC. For several years after EIF there was a disturbingly widespread and substantial shortfall by numerous States Parties in carrying out the important national implementation provisions specified in Article VII.  This led the First Review Conference to initiate an Action Plan to bring about improved Article VII implementation. Implementation of the Action Plan and its follow-up under Executive Council oversight has been occasion for excellent and sustained cooperation between and among States Parties and the Technical Secretariat, which has resulted in some notable successes.  In particular, the number of States Parties which have designated a National Authority has risen sharply to 95% of States Parties. It is nevertheless clear that additional encouragement and support to a significant number of States Parties could be of great value in further improving the implementation of Article VII provisions.  Canada therefore welcomes the EC recommendation for an extension of follow-up activities to the Action Plan. 
The verification provisions constitute the operational heart of the Convention and it is in this area that an effectively managed, technically competent and well-motivated Technical Secretariat is of critical importance.  The management leadership of recent years has brought a welcome stability and reliability to the Organisation’s operations. A particular challenge in this context has been the implementation of the staff tenure policy decided in 2003.  The recommendation before this Conference extending to 2012 an element of flexibility in the implementation of the tenure policy is in our view warranted, especially in order to ensure the continuing competence of the Inspectorate, and we trust it will be approved.  Canada nevertheless remains anxious about the potential cumulative effects of ongoing implementation of the tenure policy.  We hope that the Director-General will continue to report regularly to the Executive Council on the matter and that the policy-making organs will remain ready to take timely actions to make any warranted adjustments in the policy and its implementation. 
Concerning the particular importance of maintaining the technical competence of the Inspectorate at a high level, I am pleased to announce that Canada expects this week to conclude a Memorandum of Understanding with the Technical Secretariat providing for an annual two-week live-agent training course for OPCW inspectors in Canada.  Reflecting the policy value Canada attaches to its support to the OPCW, under the agreement Canada’s Department of National Defence will provide the training at its Counter Terrorism Technology Centre at Defence R&D Canada, Suffield, on an incremental cost recovery basis, thus covering more than two thirds of the training costs. 
I have mentioned the importance of clear and timely policy guidance from the policy-making organs. Regrettably, this has not been reliably forthcoming.  We recognise that, given the diversity of our respective interests and priorities, agreement on important policy issues will not always be quick or easy.  Nevertheless, there are some areas in which, collectively, we have lamentably failed to live up to the responsibilities the Convention requires of us.  In particular, we are failing to develop and implement comprehensively the verification provisions of Article VI and Part IX of the Verification Annex.  Specifically, Canada has been especially disappointed at our inability, despite years of effort, to reach agreement on policy decisions relating to low concentrations for Schedule 2A and 2A* chemicals and to a new site selection methodology for OCPF inspections.  In each case, the absence of a policy decision means that an important element of the Article VI verification regime continues to be not properly implemented.  In each case, we seem to have come close to a reasonable agreement.  Canada urges a priority effort to reach closure on these two items in the coming year, to enable decisions at the next Session of the Conference. 
The proposed Programme and Budget for 2007 offers more grounds for encouragement about our policy-making efforts.  A second consecutive budget involving no nominal growth in financial allocations is welcome as an indication of financial restraint and the growing efficiency of the Organisation in its operations.  Canada takes special satisfaction in an allocation of Article VI inspections with a significantly stronger orientation than hitherto toward OCPF inspections. This reflects an increased, and overdue, readiness to learn from cumulative inspection experience so as to reallocate limited inspection resources to evolving inspection priorities. 
To conclude, Mr. Chairman, effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention in all its aspects makes an essential contribution to international security.  Canada therefore remains firmly committed to joining cooperatively with other States Parties to maintain and strengthen the OPCW as a strong and effective institution for that purpose. 
(Check against delivery) 
Statement by Her Excellency Ambassador Xue Hanqin, 
Permanent Representative of China to the OPCW 
at the 11th Session of the Conference of the States Parties 

(The Hague, Netherlands, 5 December 2006) 
Mr. Chairman, 
First of all, please allow me to express my delegation’s warm congratulations on your election to the Presidency of this Session of the Conference. I am confident that with your rich diplomatic experience and outstanding skills, you will guide our Session to a full success. The Chinese Delegation pledges its full cooperation to you and to all other Delegations. I’d also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the excellent job done by your predecessor His Excellency Ambassador José Antonio Arróspide of Peru. 
Mr. Chairman, 
I wish to thank the Director-General for his comprehensive opening statement. 
The Chinese Delegation would like to associate itself with the statement made by the Ambassador of Cuba, His Excellency Mr. Oscar de los Reyes Ramos, on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement States Parties and China. The Chemical Weapons Convention is the first international instrument on complete prohibition and total destruction of a whole category of weapons of mass destruction under a stringent verification regime. It has played a crucial role in banning and destroying chemical weapons and in preventing proliferation of such weapons. We are pleased 
1 
to note that in nearly 10 years since the entry into force of the Convention, remarkable achievements have been made in promoting its universality. By now, its membership has increased to 181. Member States have also made significant progress in adopting implementation measures. China supports the efforts to further promote and implement the Plans of Action on Universality and on National Implementation Measures, with a view to bringing even more countries into the Convention and helping the countries concerned overcome their difficulties so that they can adopt the national implementation measures as required by the Convention at the earliest possible date. 
Early and total destruction of chemical weapons is a key element and fundamental goal of the Convention. While progress has been made in the destruction of chemical weapons, some possessor States are falling behind the destruction schedule envisaged in the Convention. China believes that the destruction of all chemical weapons within the timeframe laid down by the Convention is a matter that bears on the authority and credibility of the Convention. The possessor States should, in full compliance with the Convention, speed up their destruction process and make sure that all their chemical weapons are destroyed within the final deadline required by the Convention. China supports a greater role of the Technical Secretariat and the Executive Council in overseeing the destruction of chemical weapons. 
Industrial verification is a major component of the Convention, and an important instrument to prevent CW proliferation. Since the Convention entered into force, industrial verification resources have always been allocated according to the principles of hierarchy of risks inherent in the Convention and balanced geographical distribution. Such an approach has drawn support from States Parties, and resulted in more than 1,200 successful inspections. China believes that any improvement in this regard should be within the framework of the above-mentioned principles and take into full consideration of views expressed by States Parties, on the basis of drawing on the experience gained by the Technical Secretariat in the verification activities. 
International cooperation in the field of chemical industry is one of the pillars of the Convention. Effective international cooperation can play a positive role in promoting regular trade among States Parties and enhancing universality of the Convention. We encourage States Parties to give importance to the issue by increasing financial and technological input and to make effective and feasible programmes to promote exchanges and substantive cooperation. 
2 
Mr. Chairman, 
China attaches great importance to the Second Review Conference. In our view, the Second Review Conference should have a comprehensive review of the implementation of the Convention in the last ten years since its entry into force, focusing particularly on the five years since the First Review Conference. The Conference should give priority to resolving the most outstanding issues at current stage, so as to truly contribute to the comprehensive and effective implementation of all the provisions of the Convention. China will take an active and constructive part in the working group for the preparation of the Second Review Conference and contribute to the success of the Second Review Conference. 
Next year marks the 10th anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention. We believe that it is a good opportunity to present to the public the successful experience of the OPCW and its contribution to the preservation of international peace and security, and to raise the public awareness of this organization in the international community. To this end, States Parties and the Technical Secretariat need to coordinate closely and make good plans. China will actively participate in the commemorative events. 
Mr. Chairman, 
China has always been committed to the object and purpose of the Convention, and honoured its obligations under the Convention. China has stipulated and implemented relevant laws, rules and regulations for implementing the Convention; it has established National Authority and local agencies which form an effective management and control system covering the entire country. We have submitted all declarations in a timely and accurate manner. We have so far successfully received more than 120 inspections, with 23 inspections of various types in 2006 alone. Attaching great importance to non-proliferation, China has adopted an export control regime that is basically consistent with general international practices, and our law enforcement in this regard has been stringent and effective. 
The Chinese Government is actively promoting the implementation of the Convention in the Hong Kong and Macao Special Administrative Regions and the Taiwan region. Currently, implementation work in the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region is going on smoothly. 
3 
Preparations are also underway in an orderly manner for implementation in the Macao Special Administrative Region. The Chinese Government will, on the premise of “One China” principle, continue to work actively for a pragmatic solution to the issue of implementation in the Taiwan region. 
Japanese abandoned chemical weapons in China have continued to pose a serious threat not only to the life of the Chinese people, but also to ecological environment. Despite some positive progress in the disposal of Japanese ACWs thanks to the cooperation between the two countries, the substantive destruction process is yet to start. China urges the Japanese side to intensify its effort and increase its input in this regard, so as to bring about early and complete destruction of Japanese ACWs in China. China will, as always, provide appropriate cooperation. China appreciates the positive role played by the Technical Secretariat in this issue. As the destruction process enters into a more substantive stage, China welcomes the Technical Secretariat to play a more intensive and comprehensive role in the work related to destruction plan and verification. 
Mr. Chairman, 
For the international community, the Convention carries with it an ideal of a world free of chemical weapons. Facing common difficulties and challenges, China is ready to join efforts with other parties to contribute to the early realization of the object and purpose of the Convention, and to the creation of a harmonious world of lasting peace and common prosperity. Finally, I wish the Conference a full success. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
4 
STATEMENT BY THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF 
COLOMBIA, AMBASSADOR GUILLERMO FERNÁNDEZ DE 
SOTO, DURING THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE 
CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE OPCW 

The Hague, December 5th of 2006 
STATEMENT BY THE PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF 
COLOMBIA, AMBASSADOR GUILLERMO FERNÁNDEZ DE 
SOTO, DURING THE ELEVENTH SESSION OF THE 
CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE OPCW 

The Hague, December 5th of 2006 
Mr. President of the Conference, 
Mr. Director General, 
Excellencies, 
Delegates, 

I would like to start this statement by mentioning two illustrious representatives of Ibero-America, who reflect -like the "Buried Mirror" of Carlos Fuentes- our intellectual and cultural wealth as well as their special human condition. 
On the one hand, I want to praise the work carried out during the last year by the Ambassador of Peru, José Antonio Arróspide, as President of the X Conference. His friends will miss him, now that his mission is coming to an end.  
Also, I feel very honored by the presidency to be exerted by the Ambassador of Spain, Alfonso Dastis, during this XI Session. I am certain it will be as virtuous as was his leadership in the Executive Council and I reiterate all our collaboration to him in the tasks he has taken on, which will of a certainty take us one step further in our work. 
Mr. President,  
When I started writing these words, on a cold afternoon in The Hague, innumerable images of the power of devastation of chemical weapons were re-created in my mind. I remembered that the First World War caused over 90,000 fatal victims of these arms, a million wounded and thousands of tons of chemical substances that still remain latent on the face of the earth. 
I also thought about the innocent children, women and elderly, who have been victims as consequence of toxic agents; about the bleak towns without illusions and future; and about the arrogance of the human being who has devastated itself and also its environment, in wars and more wars as if it were an endless race.  
This dismal panorama neither allowed nor stimulated me to write down one more word. I put my pen and paper aside, let the hours pass and kept a reflective silence, waiting for the light of the following day. 
Mr. President,  
At the light of that new day, while reading opinion columns that announced a "new international order", "the new era of globalization" and "a new homo globatus", I decided to take up these words again. I believe that, from a historical point of view, humanity has the power to learn from the mistakes of the past and, also, has the capacity to identify the present challenges in order to construct a better world. 
Under this perspective, which recognizes that the history of the future is contained in the past, I would like to bring up some points, which several recognized contemporary intellectuals have considered to be the "three great wars of humanity against terror": the first one is against the worldwide networks of terrorists; the second against the great natural and non-natural aggressions that affect the civil infrastructure, from earthquakes and the consequences of the global heating to genocide and ethnic cleaning; and the third against weapons of mass destruction.  
And it is precisely in this last challenge in which the OPCW is making a difference and is laying out the foundations for the construction of a new history of peace, non­proliferation and disarmament, an effort on our part which the next generations, in the nearby future, will certainly recognize.  
And this legacy that is being woven has been made possible by the commitment of our nations, both in participating in the decision making on the progressive elimination of the chemical arsenals, and in implementing the Convention at a national level. In other words, multilateralism is demonstrating its virtues.  
For Colombia, this is one of the governing principles of its foreign policy. Multilateralism must be preserved and strengthened at all times. This is a necessity, and at the same time an opportunity, to construct the future of a civilization that shares its values intrinsically. The Secretary General of the United Nations, Kofi Annan, affirmed with lucidity: "to choose or to reject multilateralism is not a question of political convenience for a State, be it big or small. It has consequences that go beyond the purely immediate."  
Mr. President, 
Colombia wishes to reiterate in this session its highest political commitment to complying with the Convention, in a comprehensive way and in the established terms. Our interest is in promoting its effective implementation in our country, as well as in Latin America and the Caribbean.  
In this session, my delegation supports the declaration that the Ambassador of Cuba, Oscar de los Reyes Ramos, has stated on behalf of the Movement of the Non-Aligned Countries and China. 
I would particularly like to draw attention to some subjects that reflect the interest of my country in contributing effectively to the OPCW.  
a. Destruction of chemical weapons 
Chemical weapons constitute a threat for the international security and peace. Therefore, advances in their destruction must continue to be made –as the governing principle -, in agreement with the terms established in the Convention.  
Colombia thanks the delegations which in the course of this year have informed the OPCW of their interest in requesting an extension of the deadlines for the destruction of chemical weapons, in the certainty that they will do everything in their power to strictly fulfill the established dates, that is to say no later than the year 2012.  
Nevertheless, the slow progress registered in this matter is a reason for preoccupation. I would like to bring to mind that this Treaty must be implemented in an integral, effective and nondiscriminatory way. I think that the destruction of chemical weapons needs to continue being one of the maximum priorities of the Organization.  
In this context, my delegation considers it a positive initiative that members of the Executive Council of the OPCW should periodically visit the great possessors of chemical weapons, who have asked for a prorogation of their terms of destruction, as United Kingdom has proposed. This additional mechanism will offer greater transparency on the advances obtained. 
b. Plan of Universality 
The delegation of Colombia wishes to express its satisfaction about the positive results obtained in the implementation of the Plan of Universality of the Convention, which has led to an increase in the number of States Parties to 181. This result ratifies the fact that we are constructing and participating in a successful history.  
I would especially like to congratulate the Director General, Rogelio Pfirter, and his team of the Technical Secretariat for having reached the established goal for the year 2006. I trust that the small minority of States, altogether 14, which does not form part of the Convention, will express its unequivocal political commitment to disarmament and proliferation, ratifying and adhering to this Treaty as soon as possible.  
c. Implementation of Article VII  
Within the framework of Article VII, I would like to emphasize the important advances obtained by the States Parties in the implementation of the Convention at a national level, in particular in the establishment of national authorities and the drafting of legislation. These results have been the fruit of the valuable support of the Technical Secretariat, the efforts of the States Parties, and the firm belief in the validity of an approach of cooperation and assistance. 
Colombia reiterates that there should not be any excuses that prevent the advance in the fulfillment of the tasks contemplated in this Article. It is necessary, therefore, that States Parties redouble their efforts in order to take advantage of the dynamism obtained and to present greater results in the Twelfth Conference. At the same time, we face the challenge of efficiently taking advantage of the resources of cooperation and technical assistance offered by the Secretariat. 
The commitment of Colombia is invariable and has allowed us to obtain, among others, the following internal results: the establishment of a National Authority in 2002; a legislation that covers the main areas of the Convention; exertion of a greater control on the import of certain chemical substances; providing the initial declarations that the Convention demands, as well as the subsequent declarations, within the established terms; and providing the annual declarations of the national plans of protection against chemical weapons.  
That is to say, Colombia has fulfilled its task within the time limits agreed upon and is interested in contributing to the promotion of the implementation of the Convention in the region. In this sense, we led the organization of the second work-session with the Andean countries on national legislation against chemical arms, held in the General Secretariat of the Andean Community, this past month of April, in Lima. Also, we organized together with the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW the "Second regional meeting of representatives of the chemical industry of Latin America and the Caribbean", in June, in the city of Santa Marta, Colombia.  
d. International cooperation 
I would like to point out the importance of the international exchange of scientific and technical information and of chemical substances and equipment destined to the production, elaboration or use of chemical substances for non-prohibited aims.  
In that sense, Colombia has a great interest in strengthening the programs of cooperation of the Technical Secretariat and in realizing the complete and effective application of Article XI of the Convention. Also, it considers that the cooperation programs must have more financial and human resources in order to allow a greater number of activities with a high impact around the strategic axes of the Convention. 
e. Assistance and Protection 
The assistance and protection area is one of the branches of the Organization that are of high-priority for my country. During these last years, Colombia has been working in a close and fruitful cooperation with the Technical Secretariat on the development of national capacities of protection against chemical weapons. 
The assistance received, as well as the donation of important protective equipment given by the Government of Sweden and the OPCW, has had extraordinary results. At present we have a national system of prevention and attention of emergencies, with the active participation of the civilian and military sector, which is prepared for taking care of incidents with weapons or industrial toxic chemical substances. Also, it has allowed the country to develop capacities that have been recently offered to the Organization by virtue of Article X. 
We consider that the moment has arrived to share the experiences and strengths we acquired with Latin America and the Caribbean. This initiative has been materialized, in one first instance, through the accomplishment of a regional workshop on assistance and protection, which will be held in Bogotá between 11 and 13 of December of the current year, with the valuable financial contribution of the Czech Republic.  
In this context, my Government wishes to explicitly recognize the determined interest and cooperation of the Technical Secretariat. We hope to continue advancing in this direction. 
f. Fight against terrorism 
In the fight against chemical terrorism, our nations should no spare any efforts. I think that the OPCW, in the light of Resolution 1540 of the United Nations Security Council and the Global Strategy of the UN against terrorism, has the obligation to play a leading role to face the new global threats.  
The development of national programs of protection, the implementation at national level of the Convention and the Plan of Universality are decisive steps in this direction that allow us, without doubt, to progressively close the breaches that have been created by globalization and are being used by criminal organizations. Therefore, we need to reduce the level of vulnerability for the use of arms of mass destruction by terrorist groups, and to have a greater control over the production, distribution and use of chemical substances at global level. 
Mr. President, 
I would like to conclude this intervention remembering the words of the writer Victor Hugo, who taught us with great lucidity that "the future has many names. For the weak, it is the unattainable. For the afraid, it is the unknown. For the brave, it is an opportunity."  
I invite you to live a new opportunity: a future that spreads our aspirations of peace and security in the world. 
Thank you very much. 
Statement by Ambassador Maria Del Carman Gonzalez Cabal 
Permanent Representative of Ecuador to the OPCW 

Eleventh Conference of the States Parties 
The Hague, 5 December 2006 

Mr Chairman, 
Mr Director-General, 
Distinguished Delegates, 

Allow me to join with  the other delegations which spoke before me to congratulate you, Mr Chairman, on your election.  The delegation of Ecuador is certain that, under your leadership, the deliberations of this Conference will come to a successful conclusion.  Also, we extend our congratulations to the 10 new States which as Vice-Chairs make up the bureau of the Chairmanship of the Conference. 
I should also like to stress our recognition of the work done by the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Antonio Arrospide del Busto, Permanent Representative of Peru, whose multilateral experience and special gifts as a negotiator were evident to all during his chairmanship of the Tenth Conference. 
I should also like to take this opportunity to express my thanks to the Director-General of the OPCW, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, for the clear and analytical report which he submitted as well as the constant and intelligent work which he is doing at the head of our Organisation.   
Mr Chairman, 
Since the Tenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties in November 2005, six countries have formally adhered to our Organisation.  Therefore, we congratulate Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia, Comoros, the Central African Republic and Montenegro.  These adhesions continue the process of consolidating the universality of the CWC.  We know the enormous work that our Director-General is doing in the area of universality.  Indeed it is critical that all countries accept the jurisdiction of the OPCW, particularly the States which possess chemical weapons. 
Mr Chairman, 
Ecuador has always been a peace-loving country.  We consider ourselves, therefore, deeply committed to the work being done by the OPCW.  That is why Ecuador supports the work of a strong, universal organisation to avoid the danger presented by chemical weapons.  As a result, in the course of this year, our country has collaborated with the OPCW in each and every one of the inspections which were carried out in our national industry.  I should also like to say that, as of this Session of the Conference, Ecuador will for the first time be part of the Confidentiality Commission of the OPCW.  This will allow Ecuador to be more closely connected to the work being done by the OPCW from one of its governing bodies. 
Mr Chairman, 
Turning to the OPCW budget for the year 2007, the delegation of Ecuador agrees with the intelligent administration of resources and therefore with the zero growth in the budget for the second consecutive year. In this connection, we should also point out that Ecuador has regularly and constantly fulfilled its financial obligations vis-à-vis the OPCW. 
We are also pleased that the resources are being used equitably in international cooperation, particularly in the training of National Authority personnel to be able completely to fulfil the obligations stemming from the CWC. 
Mr Chairman, 
Since the last Conference of the States Parties to the CWC, the National Authority on chemical weapons of Ecuador, with support from the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW, has been working on its operational plan, reinforcing its own institutions, as well as developing national legislation to regulate this field, using the CWC as a framework. 
I should like to express gratitude for the constant support given by the Director-General, the International Cooperation Branch of the Technical Secretariat, and by the Legal Adviser’s Office in the training of the staff of the National Authority in matters related to the implementation of the CWC. 
As regards the OPCW tenure policy, the delegation of Ecuador shares the ideas of the Director-General, that is to say that the inspectors’ contracts could be extended until 2012 given the investment the OPCW has made in training its staff.  Therefore, it is fair to increase the period of extension of contracts, with a view to facilitating the achievement of the milestones set by the CWC. 
Mr Chairman, 
A crucial theme relating to the CWC itself is meeting the deadlines for the destruction before 2012 of declared chemical weapons.  The delegation of Ecuador is concerned to observe that new plans going are round for destruction of declared chemical weapons with deadlines which go beyond those set by the CWC. 
We know the efforts which have been made to carry out the work of destroying chemical weapons, and we recognise the good will of the parties involved, particularly if we consider that the OPCW is the international agency in which the principal possessors of chemical weapons accept the jurisdiction of the CWC and work hard to implement it.  However, we cannot fail to draw attention to the fact that setting new deadlines places doubt on the credibility of the very foundations of the OPCW. 
In conclusion, I should like to wish the best of good luck to the delegations here present so that the result of our deliberations at the Conference can be as fruitful and beneficial as possible. 
Thank you very much. 
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 11th Conference of the States Parties 
The Hague, 5 December- 8 December 2006 
Statement by 
H.E. Markus Lyra 

Under-Secretary of State, Finland on behalf of the European Union 
(Check against delivery) 
The Finnish Presidency of the European Union, 5 December 2006 
Statement of the European Union 
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
Conference of the States Parties 
5-8 December 2006 

Mr. Chairman, 
I have the honour to take the floor on behalf of the European Union. The Acceding Countries Bulgaria and Romania, the Candidate Countries Turkey, Croatia* and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia*, the Countries of the Stabilisation and Association Process and potential candidates Albania, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Montenegro and Serbia, as well as Ukraine and the Republic of  Moldova align themselves with this declaration. 
Let me open, Mr. Chairman, by expressing the European Union's full support for your leadership in chairing this Conference. I would also like to extend a warm welcome to the representatives of those six States Parties that have joined the Convention since CSP-10. 
Mr. Chairman,  
The EU Strategy Against the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction underlines the crucial role of the Chemical Weapons Convention and of this Organisation in creating a world free of chemical weapons. As part of this strategy, the EU has committed itself to working towards the universal adherence to key disarmament and non-proliferation treaties and agreements, among which is the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). The CWC can be considered a cornerstone in efforts to prevent chemical weapons from ever being obtained or used in the future. 
The European Union attaches great importance to the Chemical Weapons Convention, which not only prohibits an entire class of WMD, but also provides for the irreversible destruction of existing weapons and stockpiles under international verification within specified deadlines laid down in the Convention and decisions of the Conference. The EU reminds all possessor states that the obligation under the Convention to complete destruction of all chemical weapons by 2007, or, if granted an extension, in any case by 2012, is binding on all State Parties without exception. 
In this respect, the EU once again urges all possessor states to redouble their efforts, be they administrative, financial or technological, to destroy their stockpiles within the agreed timelines. The EU is encouraged by the progress being made by the relevant possessor states to meet these deadlines, and in particular welcomes the greatly increased pace of destruction in the Russian Federation, which has now completed destruction of some 7% of its stockpile. 
The European Union considers Council visits to CW possessor states to be a valuable and useful transparency measure for the OPCW to assess the progress of these states towards meeting their obligation under Convention. Therefore, the EU strongly supports regular Council visits to destruction facilities and construction sites for such facilities in those States Parties that are requesting 2012 as the final deadline for the destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles. The visits will enable all States Parties to satisfy themselves that all possible efforts are being undertaken by the relevant possessor states to meet the final deadline of the Convention. To facilitate an adequate geographical representation of the Council in the visiting group, the EU hopes to be in a position to offer financial support for these visits on a case by case basis. 
The European Union also recalls that after the destruction of chemical weapons, the elimination of the capacity to produce is one of the biggest priorities under the convention. We therefore renew our call on all possessor states to redouble their efforts to meet CWPF conversion deadlines. 
Mr Chairman, 
As the Director General already highlighted in his statement, the current year has been full of important developments in our area of responsibility, and full of tasks to be accomplished.  
The EU welcomes the proposed zero-growth budget for 2007 and supports the proposal for increased verification of OCPFs. Given that the OPCW has inspected only a tiny fraction of these facilities, it is essential that the proportion of the facilities that are inspected should be increased. 
The European Union remains concerned about the growing number of States Parties not paying their assessed contributions and the number of State Parties paying in instalments or only towards the end of the financial year. The EU therefore urges all States Parties to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time. 
The European Union supports the establishment of a mechanism to encourage States Parties that are in arrears and have no voting right in the policy-making organs of the OPCW to regularise the payment of their outstanding annual contributions. This will allow States Parties to demonstrate their commitment to pay their arrears, and to meet their financial obligations under the Convention. It also facilitates the consideration of applications to permit a State Party that is in arrears to vote. This would contribute to strengthening the work and credibility of the policy-making organs of the OPCW. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The effectiveness of the Convention depends greatly on universal adherence and national implementation by all States Parties. The European Union wishes to commend the efforts of the Technical Secretariat and of the existing and new existing States Parties in the area of universalisation, especially the achievement of the goal of 180 States Parties by the end of this year. We should not, however, forget that the task of completing the full universalisation still requires special efforts from all stakeholders, given the difficulties and specific issues related to the 15 countries which remain outside the Convention. The EU encourages States Parties to continue their efforts towards universalisation and also to use their bilateral contacts in this context. The EU notes with satisfaction the progress made at the workshop on universality in the Mediterranean Basin and Middle East, which was held in Rome, Italy, from 25 to 27 October this year, and underlines the significance of the workshop as a key step in achieving the universal adherence. 
Universal adherence to, and national implementation of, the CWC must both be seen as critical elements in spreading the security benefits of the Convention.  National Implementation of CWC controls goes hand in hand with the requirement of responsible governance of activities in chemical industries, and there is therefore a benefit for each State in complying fully with the Convention. 
The EU wishes to highlight the positive developments in the area of national implementation and to thank all stakeholders for their valuable contribution in this process. During this year, the EU has, both through its Joint Action and through tailored demarches in selected capitals, contributed towards these efforts of universalisation and national implementation. The EU urges States Parties not having provided information about the designation of their National Authorities and about the steps taken to enact legislation, to do so as a matter of urgency. I would like to remind the States Parties that EU assistance is available through the OPCW in the form of an EU Joint Action.  
In this connection, I am glad to announce that the European Union is currently finalising a third Joint Action in support of the OPCW, to be implemented next year. It will again benefit the core programmes of the OPCW. I hope that States Parties will see this voluntary contribution as a constructive input to the achievement of the goals of the Convention. 
Mr Chairman, 
As we look ahead to 2007, it is worth highlighting two important issues ahead of us - the Tenth Anniversary of the Convention and the preparation of the Second Review Conference. The EU is preparing to play a full part in the process of the preparation of this Review Conference. The preparation must be results-oriented, keeping in mind the huge challenges which our organisation will face during forthcoming years and even beyond 2012. The Second Review Conference is a unique opportunity to give a positive signal to the outside world, showing that the Convention remains an example of the success of the multilateral process in promoting international peace and security, and to set the scene for our future work. 
The EU stresses the importance of the Tenth Anniversary next year, and is ready to support and co-operate in the preparation of this event. This event must be utilized to highlight both the achievements of the Convention in the area of global disarmament and the challenges which we will face in the near future. The Anniversary should be used to increase the visibility and publicity of this Organisation and of its valuable work in outlawing CW. In this context, the EU would like to draw attention to the proposed unveiling in The Hague, on 9 May 2007, of a Permanent Memorial to All Victims of Chemical Weapons. 
Mr. Chairman, The EU welcomes the UN “Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy” adopted by the General Assembly on 8 September 2006, in which the OPCW and the IAEA are encouraged to continue their efforts, within their respective mandates, in helping States to build capacity to prevent terrorists from accessing nuclear, chemical and radiological materials, to ensure security at related facilities and to respond effectively in the event of an attack using such materials. Furthermore, the EU wishes to express its continuing support for the facilitation process at the OPCW on this matter based on the mandate given by the Executive Council on 7 December 2001, particularly with regard to the developing assistance and protection capabilities. The OPCW must also continue to bring added value to the fight against terrorism by making appropriate international contacts in line with resolution 1540 of the Security Council. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Let me conclude by noting that we are leaving behind us a year which was full of hard work and not without achievements. The EU wishes to thank all stakeholders, especially those involved in this process as facilitators, for their valuable work in sometimes difficult decision-making. Furthermore, the EU wishes to pay a special tribute to Mr. Pfirter, Director General of this organisation. Under his capable and competent guidance, our organisation has been able to address numerous difficult tasks and in particular, the call from the outside world for concrete actions. I am sure that, in a spirit of constructive cooperation, we can work to ensure that the OPCW is also seen as having the best instruments to address the current threats and challenges to peace and security in the world. 
I thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
* Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia continue to be part of the Stabilisation and Association Process. 
, 
STATEMENT BY HON. PAPA OWUSU·ANKOMAH. MINISTER FOR 
EDUCATION. SCIENCE AND SPORTS AND LEADER OF GHANA'S DELEGATION 
TO THE 11'" SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES OF THE 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION {CWCl 

THE HAGUE· NETHERLANDS DECEMEBER 5 . B, 2006 
Mr. Chairmen 
Distinguished Delegates 
I bring you warm and sincere greetings from fhe Government and 
.' 	People of Ghana. I personally also heartily congratulofe you Mr. Chairman on your election to preside over Ihis oll·impartant Il'h Session of fhe Conference of States Parties. 
This Session is of great significance because of two major events. 
namely the celebration of Ihe 10'h anniversary of the coming into force of the Convention in April 2007 and the Second Review Conference. 
I also take this opportunity to congratUlate your predecessor Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide of Peru for the able manner he sfeered the affairs of the 1O'h Session of the Conference of States Parties. 
, 
A cardinal principle in the pursuance of Ghana's foreign policy is the great importance the Government of Ghana attaches to fultilling the country's international obligations. Ghana demonstrated this by its keen interest in the Chemical Weapons Convention by immediately signing the text of the Convention when it was opened for signature in 1993. This was followed by the ratitication of the Convention in July 1997. 
My very presence at Ihis 1jlh Session is an ample and clear teslimony of Ihe importance we attach to the Convention and its core obligations particularly its domestication through national legislation. 
Mr. Chairman. 
We wish to reaffirm our declaration that Ghana is not a possessor state. Nevertheless. we are also not oblivious of our international obligations given the prevailing global environment mar1<ed by ever­increasing insecurity and the threat posed by terrorism through the use of chemical weapons and other weapons of mass destruction. Ghana is therefore committed to the universality of the Convention and the non­proliferation as pursued by the UN Security Council. 
The Ghana Ministry of Education, Science and Sports is currently the designated focal point tor the CWC. The Ghana Notional Authority, which was established in 1998 with representation from various sector Agencies, whose work ore considered relevant to the country's obligations under the CWC, is thereJore under the Ministry's jurisdiction. The Authority's membership has recently been expanded to include the Food and Drugs Boord, 0 representative of 011 the Universities of Ghana and the Ministry of Notional Security, as their mandates relafe to the core obligations of the Chemical Weapons Convention in Ghana. 
Mr. Chairman 
.. Despite the absence of specific chemical weapons legislation Ghana has laws for the control and management of chemicals as stipulated in the Environmental Protection Agency Act of 1994 (Act 490) and Pesticides Control and Management Act ot 1996 (Act 528). These require the issuance of Permits to import all chemicals as well as for Clearance Certificates to cleor them from the ports of entry. Any individual who contravenes these provisions is liable to face a penalty. 
In July 2006 Ghana submitted to the OPCW Legal Workshop for National Authorities in Central and West Africo held in Ouagadougou, Burkina 'Faso, a Draft Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMDI Act. The Draft 
covers Ghana's international obligations in biological, chemical and 
nuclear weopons, inclUding the country's obligotions to enact national legislation and implementation measures under the Convention. The Technical Secretariat's comments ore being incorporated into fhe Draft Act. 
Mr, Chairman, 
As I have outlined above, Ghana is committed to meeting its obligations under the Convention. The challenges faced by Ghana and other developing countries have been severally chronicled in reports by the Director-General. the Technical Secretariat and in the African Group's statements as well as in statements by the Non-Aligned Movement and China. I urge the Conference to provide whatever assistance it could possibly give to countries that may hove delayed in fully meeting their obligations. I wish to assure you Mr. Chairman that fhis is not due to 0 lack of political will but rather the fact that we face myriad pressing needs and challenges. 
2 
The assistance provided by the International Cooperation and Assistance IICA) Unit under the Technical Secretariat goes a long way in 
assisting countries such as mine in boosting our capacities to effectively 
implement our obligations. Over the past year Ghana has participated in 
a number of training programmes. workshops and seminars organized by 
the OPCW with the aim at building upon its capacity in the chemical 
sector. 
The ICA programmes have been immensely beneticial and have further enhanced the pertormance of the Ghana National Autharity and other agencies allied to the country's chemical industry. We are deeply grateful far such suppart. 
We call far the Organization's increased suppart far its International Cooperation and Assistance programmes. 
.' 
Mr. Chairman, 
Ghana like other African States Parties to the OPCW. reaffirms its conviction that the establishment of an OPCW Regional Office in Africa would contribute in no small way to deepening Africa's commitment as well as the achievement of universality of the Convention on the 
continent. 
I therefare entreat States Parties who may have reservations relating to the establishment of the Office to reconsider their position in the light of 
the obvious benefits to Africa. 
We encourage the Conference to extend far additional year its Decision far the Technical Secretariat to follow up efforts. far the establishment of the Africa Office. We laud States Parties which have expressed and confinue to express their suppart far the establishment of the Office. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The Government and people of Ghana are thankful to States 
Parties which have offered, and continue to offer, assistance in one form 
or the other to Ghana through the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW. As a State Party and member of the Executive Council of the OPCW, Ghana is totally committed to the full realization of the aims and objectives of the Convention and to the total elimination of chemical weapons globally. Ghana will therefore do all within its power in collaboration with Iike­minded States Parties to bring this about. 
3 
We call on States Parties to contribute positively to the success of the Second Review Conference in the spirit of consensus and collaboration that hos been the hallmark of this Organization. 
We suggest that all States Porties consider organizing local activities to celebrate the 10'" anniversary of the coming into force of the 
Convention. 
On the issue of destruction. Ghana calls on all deciared possessor States to abide by the extended deadlines for the destruction of Schedule 
One chemical weapons and the conversion of chemical weapons 
facilities as further extensions would put the credibility and integrity of the Convention at stake. 
Finally Mr. Chairman I wish to commend the host country for the .. constructive position it has taken with regord to the concerns of States Parties as expressed through the Host Country Committee. 
We also extol the Director General for his able stewordship and the good work he is doing. Mr. Director-General. we wish you a successtul tenure of office and assure you. the Technical Secretariat and all States Parties. of the fullest support and co-operation of the Government and People of Ghana. 
I wish us all fruitful deliberations and a very successful Conference. 
Thank you. 
4 

(Check against delivery) 


Statement by 
H.E. Mr. Junus Effendi Habibie 
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia 
to the GPCW / Head ofthe Delegation 

At 

The 11th Session of the Conference of States Parties ofthe 
Chemical Weapons Convention 

The Hague, 5 December 2006 

16.30 hrs. 
Mr. Chairman, 
At the outset, allow me to join other delegations in extending our sincere felicitations to you as the newly elected Chairman of this year's Conference of States Parties. We are confident that your able stewardship will contribute greatly to the success of our deliberations. As in previous conferences, please be assured of my delegation's full support and cooperation as we look forward to a favourable and productive session. 
We also would like to pay our tribute to your 10th
predecessor, the Chairman of the Conference, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide of Peru and applaud him for his exceptional work and successful steering of the last conference. 
Further, my delegation wishes to avail this opportunity to extend its warm felicitations to the Republic of Cuba in assuming the Chairmanship of the Non-Aligned Movement as we associate to the statement delivered by H.E. Ambassador Oscar de los Reyes Ramos of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned Movement and China. 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates 
The Indonesian delegation warmly notes the undertakings made to this Convention in fostering peace and security. It is for this reason that my delegation wishes to warmly welcome the new States Parties that have acceded to 
10th
the Chemical Weapons Convention since the Conference of States Parties. Their accession to the Convention brings us closer to the universality of the Convention. 
It is at this point we submit to you Mr. Chairman the activities of Indonesia in its evident and unwavering commitment to this Convention. As you may know, Mr. Chairman, Indonesia has been continuously taking every effort in implementing its obligations such as submitting declarations and receiving inspections. As such, 5 successful inspections have so far been conducted by the OPCW inspection team and consequently cleared from previous declarations. It only shows once more and on the spot, that the provisions ofthe Convention are being properly applied. 
Another is the close working relationship with the OPCW to organize three programs in Indonesia, namely: Workshop on Industry Awareness on the Practical Implementation of the Chemicals Weapons Convention last February 2006, National Emergency Response Workshop on Assistance and Protection from Chemical Weapons, and Advance Training Course for Response Team, which were both held last June 2006. 
My delegation is also pleased to inform you of the successful conclusion of the Fourth Regional Meeting of National Authorities of States Parties in Asia held early of September this year in Jakarta. The program was subsequently opened officially by Indonesia's Minister of Foreign Affairs and the Director General of the OPCW. In collaboration with the Secretariat, the meeting, which was concluded with 88 participants from 27 different countries including Myanmar who has rendered political support in the objectives and principles of the Convention and together with other resource personalities, further sustains the understanding of participating National Authorities in Asia of the implementation requirement of the Convention whilst giving an appropriate opportunity for exchange of information and experiences. 
At the national level, the Director General of the OPCW and other dignitary public figures such as Cabinet Ministers, and Parliament members exchanged views on OPCW's implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention as well as the progress of Indonesia's implementation of the Convention. The meeting concluded wherein the Indonesian Foreign Affairs Minister, on behalf of the Government, reiterated its unwavering support for the OPCW's mission whilst both sides agreed to intensify their cooperation in the fulfilment ofthe Convention goals. 
As a showcase of Indonesia's willingness and seriousness on its part to fully implement the Plan of Action, my delegation wishes to inform you, Mr. Chairman, that a priority was being given for passage of a draft law through the Parliament to anchor the Convention's stipulation within the national law with the aim of adopting the legislation no later than mid-2007. In accordance with Indonesia's constitutional process, the President officially conveyed the draft law to the Chairman ofthe Parliament. 
With regards to the activities in 2007, I am pleased to inform you that Indonesia together with Australia and Japan are planning to hold a workshop for industrial sector in Jakarta. 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates, 
We see for the fact that it is imperative for this Organization to strike a balance among the three pillars as stated in the Convention, namely: first, the destruction of existing stockpiles of chemical weapons; second, the effort of the organization aimed at non-proliferation of chemical weapons and third, the International Cooperation and Assistance. 
Of the three pillars, the Indonesian delegation attaches great importance that the chemical weapons destruction should remain the highest priority. It is in everyone's concerns that the existence of chemical weapons poses and will always remain a serious threat to international peace and security. 
Thus, we underscore that the complete, irreversible and verifiable destruction of chemical weapons and its relevant facilities at the targeted date is one of the core objectives set by the Convention. In this end, we reiterate our call to the major Chemical Weapon possessor states to spearhead their efforts and adhere to their obligations stated in the Convention. This is vital for the credibility of the Convention as destruction and elimination of chemical weapons is the core objective ofthis Convention. 
Moreover, Indonesia also attaches great importance to the efforts to promote International Cooperation and Assistance. Effective International Cooperation and Assistance, which constitutes the highest political relevance to the objectives of the Convention, will have a positive impact on the full implementation and enhancement of universality ofthe Convention. Hence, Indonesia encourages an allocation increase for financial and technological assistance to strengthen international cooperation. 
Mr. Chairman, Distinguished delegates, 
With respect to the Plan of Action on the implementation of Article VII of the Convention, we note that as of 29 September 2006, 950/0 of the States Parties have designated or established their National Authorities. With this, my delegation warmly welcomes the recommendation by the Executive Council during its 47th Session for one-year extension for the provisions taken during the 10th Conference of States Parties on the decision concerning the Follow-up to the Plan of Action Regarding the Implementation of Article VII Obligations. Thus, my delegation supports to continue its constructive engagement and to provide all possible assistance to States Parties in the process ofthe implementation ofthe Plan of Action. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Another worthwhile issue to be considered and deserved stronger attention is the full implementation of Article XI. 
Though we are close to reaching our goal for universality of this Convention, my delegation finds it unessential to impose undue and unnecessary restrictions in the field of trade in chemicals, equipment and related technologies for peaceful purposes to those States Parties which have shown and implemented their obligations in good faith. 
It is a common knowledge that undue and unnecessary restrictions potentially severe international trade. In acceding to the Convention, States Parties are bounded to prohibit the use, production and trade of chemical weapons but not those for peaceful purposes as guaranteed by Article XI ofthe Convention. 
Having known of this fact, it is timely for the Organization to address these matters and fulfil the spirit of the Convention for removal of all forms of unwarranted restrictions. My delegation strongly reiterates and urges all 
States Parties to show a constructive approach and non­discriminatory implementation of all provisions of the Convention as rightfully shown during the decision taken from last year's Conference of States Parties. 
With the international architecture for promoting peace already in place, perhaps we could now start laying the foundations in making the Convention contribute to the promotion of prosperity among its States Parties at mutual and equal level. 
Mr. Chairman, 
In response to administrative and financial matters, my delegation takes due note of the considerable time and effort for deliberations on the Draft Budget of the Organization for 2007 and we hence express our sincere and warm appreciation for the facilitators and the Secretariat in steering towards common resolution on this issue. Nonetheless, we reiterate that proper allocation in the regular budget for key programmes and activities remain essential in the interest of the effective operation of the OPCW. 
My delegation is also aware of the future implementation of the OPCW policy on tenure. We welcome the recommendation by the Executive Council in extending the exceptional authority of the Director General only to avoid any adverse operational impact in the activities of the Secretariat. However, we dearly emphasize that employment of personnel in the Secretariat should remain fair and transparent and, to a much extent, as geographically represented as possible. 
Likewise, we also welcome the recommendation taken during the last session of the Executive Council on the establishment of a committee on relations with the host country to resolve in a constructive and timely fashion any issues that may arise in connection with the interpretation and implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. 
In submitting these attentions, Mr. Chairman, our earnest hopes that the issues presented today will be appropriately deliberated as I once again reiterate my delegation's full support and cooperation in ensuring the success ofthis year's Conference. 
Thank you. 
Statement 
by 
Ambassador Ms. Neelam D. Sabharwal, 
Permanent Representative of India to the OPCW and  
Leader of the Indian Delegation to  
the 11th Session of the Conference of States Parties 
December 5-8, 2006 

Mr. Chairperson, 
My delegation joins me in congratulating you on assuming the office of the Chairman of the 11th Conference of States Parties. Having seen your abilities and skills in guiding us during Executive Council Sessions in the past, it is a pleasure to see you once again in the Chair, to preside over the deliberations of this Conference.  We are more than confident that with your leadership qualities you will steer us towards a successful conclusion of the 11th Conference of States Parties.  I would like to extend to you the full support and cooperation of my delegation during this Conference. 
2. 
I would also like to pay a warm tribute to the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide of Peru who guided our work with great wisdom and skill during the 10th Conference of States Parties. 

Mr. Chairperson, 

3. 
My delegation fully endorses and associates itself with the statement delivered by the distinguished Ambassador of Cuba, on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China.  

4. 
We would like to thank the Director General for his comprehensive and detailed report.  We are confident that under his stewardship, the Technical Secretariat and its staff of highly trained 

professionals would continue their good work for the benefit of all States Parties and in pursuing the goals and objectives set forth in the Convention.  We would also like to express our warmest appreciation for DG’s unstinting efforts to promote the objectives of the Convention and its universal membership. 

5. 
India welcomes the new States Parties – Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia, Comoros, Central African Republic, Montenegro - who have joined the Organization since the 10th Session of CSP. With a membership of 181, we are steadily moving towards our common objective of achieving universal adherence to the Convention.  The active participation of all new members in the Organization will strengthen it further. 

Mr. Chairperson, 

6. 
The elimination of chemical weapons is the primary objective of this Convention. India’s credentials in the area of destruction of chemical weapons are well known and widely acknowledged.  We have accomplished all the three intermediate deadlines for the destruction of category 1 chemical weapons set by the Convention, and remain committed to complete their destruction in accordance with the Convention.  Since the 10th Conference, we have made big strides towards destroying the remaining stocks and have already destroyed nearly 75% of category 1 chemical weapons under the stringent verification regime of the Organization.  In view of technical explanations submitted to the Council, we requested for setting April 

2009 as the deadline for the complete destruction of all our chemical weapons stockpiles.  We hope that the Conference will approve the decision of the 45th Council in this regard.  We expect that the destruction programmes of all other possessor states will also proceed in accordance with the timelines prescribed by the Convention. 

7. 
Other objectives, that are no less significant, also need to be operationalized to achieve their full purpose.  I am referring to the slow progress in realising international cooperation and assistance to its fullest level.  India attaches great importance to the full implementation of Article XI of the Convention and for the fostering of international cooperation for peaceful uses of chemistry. An important decision was adopted on Article XI at the 10th CSP. We are disappointed that there has been little follow-up on the decision and the report of the Council required by the last Conference is not yet ready for submission to the 11th Conference. We would like to reiterate that this Conference should mandate the Executive Council to develop an Action Plan for the implementation of Article XI for approval by the next Session of the Conference.  A continued neglect of this pillar of the Convention, we feel, is contrary to our agreed aim of full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of Convention.  We, therefore, look forward to cooperation of all States Parties for a constructive approach to this long pending, key aspect of the Convention. 

8. 
India recognizes the importance of verification measures for activities not prohibited under the Convention.  The Convention clearly outlines the provisions for the verification of relevant chemical industry facilities.  For the application of verification measures, the Annex on Chemicals lists the schedules in accordance with the hierarchy of risks posed by them to the object and purpose of the Convention.  This hierarchy of risks determines the inter se priority of inspections of relevant facilities. A shift in the distribution of inspections away from scheduled chemical facilities marks a departure from the fundamental principles of the verification regime laid down by the Convention. We believe that our common objective is to ensure that the OPCW’s verification activities are in strict accordance with the provisions of the Convention, and relative to the risk the concerned facilities present to the object and purpose of the Convention. 

9. 
We have noted that the distribution of inspection resources for Article VI inspections in the Programme of work and budget for 2007. We firmly believe that the budget proposals should not alter the verification priorities.  Any discussion on the frequency of inspections of various types of scheduled facilities should be undertaken as an independent exercise to establish a clear policy on this matter. 

Mr. Chairperson, 

10. 
With regard to another important aspect of the OPCW Programme of Work and budget for 2007, let me recall that the NAM 


Mr. Chairman, 
States Parties and China have for long been reiterating a demand for substantial increase in the budgetary allocation for international cooperation and assistance programmes. The proposed small enhancement in the budget allocations for capacity building activities of the international cooperation programmes in 2007, still falls short of our expectations, as indeed of all NAM States Parties and China. 
11. 
The 10th Conference of States Parties adopted a decision on the follow up of implementation of Article VII Action Plan. The approach of encouragement, cooperation and assistance which was adopted by the 10th Conference of States Parties has resulted in very significant achievements so far. We are happy that the Executive Council has at its 47th Session recognized the positive contribution of this approach and has endorsed its continuation for another year.   

12. 
In the light of the rationale elaborated by the Director General in requesting an extension of the flexibility for the future implementation of the tenure policy, India has supported the draft decision on this issue.  We are confident that it would be implemented in line with the past decisions of the Conference of the States Parties. 

13. 
India supports the request of African States Parties and the African Union for an OPCW Office in Africa and hopes that details of the proposal would be successfully worked out.  

14. 
The Conference would consider a draft decision on the establishment of the Host Country Committee and we hope that the 


Conference will approve it.  This important as it should lead to the early resolution of all outstanding issues in the full implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. 
Mr. Chairperson, 
15. The Second Review Conference presents an opportunity to review the operation of the Convention, which is a successful, multilaterally-negotiated, universal and non-discriminatory disarmament treaty. The most important task before this Conference will be to uphold the Convention in its entirety and reiterate our unreserved commitment to the implementation of all its aspects.  We are pleased to note the Open Ended Working Group on the 2nd Review Conference has started its preparatory work under the able Chairmanship of Ambassador Lyn Parker of the United Kingdom. The States Parties, who bear the prime responsibility for the implementation of the Convention, should guide the review process at all stages.  Their first hand experience provides a sound basis for the working of the Open-ended Working Group.  India attaches high importance to deliberations of the Group and look forward to a constructive engagement with other States Parties to the Convention. 
Thank You Mr. Chairperson. 
* * * 
Statement by 
H. E. Dr. Manouchehr Mottaki 
Minister for Foreign Affair 
before 
the 11th Session of the Conference of States Parties 

The Hague, 6 December 2006 

Please check against delivery 
In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
Mr. Chairman, 
I would like to begin by congratulating you on your well-deserved election as the Chairman of the Conference.  
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director General, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
For millenniums, millions of people, military and civilians alike, have fallen victim to the means of warfare. To avert human losses, attempts have been made to address the causes of war and prepare for the conditions of peace, through, inter-alia disarmament agreements. The records of such undertakings are rather mixed. In some areas achievements are notable, while in some other areas the international community is yet to forge a common understanding and consensus on divergent issues, that is mainly due to double standard and self interest seeking by certain powers.  
It gives me a great pleasure, as the Foreign Minister of the last victim of chemical weapons, to address the 11th Conference of States Parties of the Chemical Weapons Convention. In its invasion of Iran, the former regime of Iraq resorted to chemical weapons. Military personnel and civilians were targeted. Thousands of our citizens either lost their lives or suffered chemical injuries. There is no single month going without the demise of some of these victims. The situation of chemical injured persons, experiencing a gradual painful death, is abhorring. Many families, round the clock, cater to the special needs of these people. They face, at the same time, the emotional pressure of the victims’ gradual death. On top of all these, one might add the trauma the children of the victims are going through. This situation has also imposed a financial and logistical burden on the Government in terms of providing necessary services to over 60,000 chemical injured persons.  
We are not able to make up for those victims who have passed away, but could help alleviate the human suffering of the survivors of chemical weapons. To this end, I submit the establishment of a support network to mobilize international care, addressing their special needs. I have instructed the Iranian delegation to the OPCW, in preparation for the Second Review Conference, to advance this submission and to confer with other delegations thereon.   
The use of chemical weapons, we firmly believe, must not happen again. The perpetrators of such crimes should not enjoy impunity. Suppliers of these inhumane weapons to Saddam's regime must be brought to justice. We urge those states whose nationals or companies were involved in supply of such material and equipment to former Iraqi regime to take the necessary measures against them. This would send a strong message that crimes could not go unpunished. In this respect, the exertions of the Government of the Netherlands and its justice system to prosecute a Dutch national who was involved in transfer of chemical agents to Sadam Hossein’s regime are laudable. I should note that 400 European and American companies have provided Sadame’s regime with chemical agents, equipment and technology for chemical weapons. 
However, it is heartening to note that the aspiration instilled in this very city in 1899 by an international peace conference to ban the use of projectiles filled with poison gas has culminated in the Convention on Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction, as well as creation of the OPCW. The CWC, in our view, sets a successful example. It indicates that seemingly far-reaching objectives are attainable should the political will and determination exist.  
The CWC is equally a unique comprehensive multilateral agreement banning an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. It pushes multilateralism beyond the often narrowly perceived power politics. It is non-discriminatory. It does not create a category of haves and have nots. It is a truly non-proliferation and disarmament treaty in that it has designed a time-bound destruction program. And, it is simultaneously to promote international cooperation in the field of chemical technology. 
Time and efforts put in gradual development of the OPCW are commendable. I am touched by the spirit of understanding, consensus building and cooperation among the Organization and the State Parties. I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate all the States Parties, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, the Director General, and his colleagues in the Technical Secretariat for their accomplishment. 
However, there is no room for complacency. We have a long road ahead. Today, problems are becoming of global nature. Global environment, weapons of mass 
2 

destruction, Aids epidemic etc requires global responses and participation. For this, we should uphold the principle of one state, one vote of the UN charter. 
Destruction of chemical weapons is and remains the most fundamental bedrock of the Convention. This obligation forms the very basic security balance devised in the Convention. Therefore, the success and credibility of the Convention would be judged by realization of the destruction. We are alarmed at the slow pace of destruction vis-à­vis the expected timetable. While the Convention foresees, in exceptional cases, a minimum extension for destruction of chemical weapons, at most by 2012, it has stressed, as a rule, that this obligation should be implemented not later than 10 years after entry into force of the Convention. If the major possessors would not meet the deadline as in the case with Kyoto Protocol, what should be done? 
Approaching the deadline, there is the need for acceleration of destruction process. We urge all possessor states, in particular the major possessors, to spare no efforts to meet the deadlines set forth by the Convention for completion of their chemical weapons destruction. These exertions, in this regard, might include allocation of additional resources, removal of national and administrative constraints and development of more speedy methods of destruction. One has to remind that any failure to meet this fundamental obligation would constitute violation of the Convention. Does the UN Security Council is able to address this violation?  
The non-possessor States Parties also have a role to play. They should remain vigilant and closely monitor the implementation of the obligations of the possessors. In this respect, the Second Review Conference in 2008 would provide a propitious opportunity to review further destruction progress. 
Iran has a high record of accession to non-proliferation and disarmament treaties and conventions. It is a party to Biological Weapons Convention, Chemical Weapons Convention and the NPT. By acceding to Chemical Weapons Convention, the States Parties have foregone the possession of such weapons. Iran has proved its commitment to non- proliferation by refraining from retaliation against the wide spread use of chemical weapons by Iraq during its 8 year invasion of Iran.  There has been a considerable increase in the number of CWC States Parties. However, I should argue that without universality of CWC the States Parties are not protected against any possible chemical attack by a non state party. This is more critical in the Middle East region where the Convention falls short of full accession. The Middle East is one of the very few regions in which chemical weapons have been used in warfare since the Second World War. Full accession and elimination of chemical weapons in the 
3 

Middle East will prevent the possibility of their use, thus enhancing the regional security. 
Cognizant of the significance of universality of the Convention for international peace and security, the Islamic Republic of Iran advocates a new momentum to bolster the efforts of the Technical Secretariat and in particular the OPCW Director General in this area. The single most dangerous case is Zionist entity. This regime with its weapons of mass destruction, including chemical and nuclear weapons, is the most dangerous threat against regional and international peace and security.     
All the articles of the Convention are interrelated and mutually reinforcing. Article XI of the Convention on international cooperation has served as an incentive for accession thereto. Based on this assumption, it has been established that the Convention shall not hamper the economic and technological development of the States Parties and shall promote chemical trade among States Parties for peaceful purposes. Regrettably, the provisions of this article are yet to be fully implemented. The Article has been, for long, treated as a secondary feature of the Convention. An essential element for the full implementation of the Convention is promotion of free trade in the field of peaceful uses of chemistry. Application of any ad-hoc and arbitrary restrictions to exchange of technology, material and equipment for peaceful purposes between the CWC States Parties runs counter to the spirit and letter of the Convention and is, therefore, unlawful and tries to create a scientific and technological apartheid. The export control regimes shall be brought in line with the provisions of the Convention. 
The 10th anniversary of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention is a high time for celebration. It is also an occasion for renewal of the commitment to disarmament within a non-discriminatory and multilateral framework. During the last several decades some have tried to redefine the international non-proliferation and disarmament treaties to their own liking. They present themselves as the voice of the international community and guardians of these norms. Likewise, they perceive themselves above the international law and ignore their own obligations. Some even go that far to unilaterally abrogate disarmament treaties or obstruct the conclusion of several years of international negotiations, since these no longer suit their interests. Unilateralism, selectivity, discrimination, and circumvention of the international obligations would certainly undermine the credibility and integrity of the international non-proliferation and disarmament treaties.  
The Islamic Republic of Iran maintains that international treaties are composed of sets of obligations and rights. All parties, regardless of their size, population and power, 
4 

are equal in terms of their obligations and rights. No single state or group of states is above the law. All states parties to a treaty should abide by their obligations and enjoy their rights. That is why we constantly insist on our right to develop nuclear enrichment capability.  
During the first ten years, the Organization has mainly focused on elaboration and development of its institutional capacity, including its verification regime. As we drive forward, there is the need to intensify our efforts towards full implementation of the provisions of the Convention, ensuring universality and meeting the destruction deadline. 
With the objectives of peace and justice for all, let us build on our achievement in OPCW and work hand in hand to rid the world of the scourges of weapons of mass destruction. Let us do away with selfishness, imposition and war. Let us make this world a safer place for the present and future generations.  
I thank you Mr. Chairman and wish you every success in your deliberations. 
5 

Check against delivery 
Delegation of Japan 

Statement by H.E. Mr. Takeshi Nakane, 
Ambassador 
Director-General, 
Disarmament, Non-Proliferation and Science Department 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

at 

the Eleventh Session of the Conference of States Parties of the OPCW 
The Hague, The Netherlands 5 December 2006 
Mr. Chairman, Director-General, Your Excellencies, and distinguished delegates, 
At the outset, allow me to congratulate Your Excellency Ambassador Alfonso Dastis of Spain on your election as Chairman of the Conference of the States Parties. I am confident that the Conference will be most successful under your strong leadership and experienced diplomatic skills. I assure you of my delegation’s full support and cooperation for your efforts to ensure the success of the Conference. I also wish to warmly welcome His Excellency Ambassador Carlos Mora to the Chair of the Committee of the Whole. 
I would also like to express our sincere appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide Del Busto of Peru, Chairman of the Tenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties, for his excellent leadership. 
My sincere appreciation will equally be delivered to Her Excellency Ambassador Hlengiwe Buhle Mkhize of the Republic of South Africa, Chairman of the Executive Council, for her leadership and efforts for the success of the Executive Council. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The Chemical Weapons Convention is the first disarmament and non-proliferation treaty in the history of mankind which aims at elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. Keenly aware of the uniqueness of the Convention and the expectations of the international community, Japan wishes to reiterate its commitment to the goal of the Convention and we promise that we will continue to make our efforts to make this organization a leading model for the disarmament and non-proliferation regimes of the world. 
In this connection, I would like to underline the following five points: namely, universality, implementation, capacity building, counter-terrorism and budget.   
Mr. Chairman, 
My first point comes to Universality. We should make our utmost efforts on universal renunciation of chemical weapons. This year has been a good year for all of us as we have already achieved and exceeded the target number of 180 States Parties set by the decision adopted by the Tenth Session of the Conference of States Parties. Japan welcomes the Republic of Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia, Comoros, the Central African Republic and Montenegro who have joined the Convention as States Parties since the last session of the Conference, which made the total number of States Parties 
181. We must keep this momentum. Japan also welcomes the intention of Iraq and Lebanon to join the Convention and encourages the both countries to prepare for its accession to the Convention as soon as possible. 
As we approach towards the 10-year Anniversary of the Convention after its entry into force, Japan urges all the remaining States not Party including Israel, Egypt, Syria, Myanmar, and DPRK to join the Convention immediately. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My second point is the full implementation of the obligations under the Convention. It is an important means of fighting proliferation and chemical terrorism. We have witnessed a fair improvement of the implementation of Article VII obligations since the adoption of the Plan of Action. It is noteworthy that only 33% of the States Parties implemented the necessary legislation covering all the key areas for enforcement of the Convention at the previous session of CSP, but the implementation rate has now increased to 40% to report to this Session. This is a very encouraging sign. It reflects the fact that those States Parties are seriously engaged in fulfilling article VII obligations. Those States Parties which have not notified should notify the OPCW on the steps they have taken to enact legislation and adopt administrative measures to implement the Convention in accordance with the relevant Conference decisions. 
My third point, Mr. Chairman, is very much related to the issues of universality and implementation. Promotion of universality and implementation needs to be supported by technical assistance. Without national capability to implement the obligations under the Convention, States not Party may feel unenthusiastic in joining the Convention and implement them. It is worth noting that a significant number of States Parties that have not enacted its national legislation have been seeking advice and assistance from the Secretariat. 
In this connection, I would like to call upon the States Parties and the Secretariat to intensify their efforts in following up the Plan of Action regarding the Article VII obligations, and create conducive environment. On our part, Japan is ready to provide legal and technical assistance for national legislation in cooperation with the Secretariat as we did in Brunei, Cambodia and Iraq in the past. We also very much look forward to having a joint seminar with Australia in Indonesia next year. 
I would also like to reiterate Japan’s firm commitment to the international cooperation programs which contribute to capacity building of States Parties in the course of implementing the Convention. In this regard, Japan has been supporting the Associate Program through voluntary contributions for the last three years and received trainees. Japan is of the view that the Associate Program provides the participants with opportunities to learn the effective implementation of the industry-related provisions of the Convention as well as to learn the practices of modern chemical industry through on-site industrial training. We find the results satisfactory. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My previous points mentioned will all converge to this fourth point, i.e., the importance of national implementation in preventing terrorist activities. Japan enacted the “Chemical Weapons Prohibition Law” which prohibits the use, production, and transfer of chemical weapons and their materials by penal provisions, just before the ratification of the Convention in 1995. Were this Law enacted and implemented well before the sarin gas attacks on the Tokyo Subway, we could have had controlled the terrorist attacks more rigorously. In the aftermath of the sarin gas terrorist attacks, Japan also implemented the law specifically targeting prevention of terrorist attacks using sarin and other toxic chemicals. It also specifies measures to be taken by security officials when injury by sarin and other toxic chemicals has occurred or is likely to occur. What these experiences suggest is that if national laws and regulations prohibiting the use, production, and transfer of chemical weapons and related materials are to be implemented on a global basis, world-wide counter-terrorism measures will be formulated, and CWC would be in a pivotal position in discharging its responsibility in the global fight against terrorism. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My last point comes to budget. It is a budget that makes CWC’s implementation possible. Japan welcomes the efforts made by the Director-General on the draft program and budget for 2007 with zero nominal growth. We encourage the Secretariat to continue to explore cost-saving measures in carrying out its activities. Another important issue would be the efficient and effective resource allocation. Indeed, within the given resources, efficient and effective resource allocations would make the program activities more viable and accountable. It is a budget that makes realistic assessments about the program of work, including increases in both chemical weapons destruction monitoring and inspections of industrial facilities. 
Intensive negotiations on the issues of resource allocations on the inspections are still in progress in the draft decision on budget. Japan sincerely hopes that reasonably agreeable point will be found without delay among parties concerned. 
I would also like to point out that for the sake of effective budget utilization and inspections, the issue of OCPF site selection methodology and the issue of late submission need to be solved in a prompt manner. Japan urges the fellow States Parties negotiating these issues to be more flexible and constructive in a spirit of cooperation so as to reach consensus in the near future. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The goal of the Convention will never be achieved without eliminating the existing Chemical Weapons stockpiles in the declared Possessor States. We expect full compliance of credible verification activities by all Possessor States. Japan would also like to commend the efforts made by the Secretariat in seeking optimization of the verification activities. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Japan has been making utmost efforts to destruct abandoned chemical weapons in close cooperation with China, hoping that a negative memory in the past would be transformed into a good model of Japan-China cooperation for the future. 
In this context, Japan has been conducting excavation and recovery work in China. This year, Japan dispatched 4 on-site investigation mission teams and 5 excavation and recovery mission teams in various areas in China. We have so far recovered more than 1700 projectiles. As this demonstrates, Japan is seriously committed to complete the destruction of ACWs and has been making efforts to accelerate the process. Japan also had 2 trilateral meetings with China and the Secretariat this year. 
We will continue our utmost efforts to dispose of the ACWs in China in close cooperation with Chinese authorities and the Secretariat. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Industry verification regime is one of the important tools for the OPCW. Japan recognizes that a significant number of discrepancies in the declaration of transfer data provided by the States Parties is a great concern in light of the objective of the Convention, due to the lack of common understanding on the definitions of import and export among the States Parties. We all need to make efforts in solving this issue. 
Mr. Chairman, 
To conclude my remarks, I would like to reiterate that Japan remains committed to the goal of the Convention: a world free from chemical 
weapons. Japan is determined to make every possible effort to promote universality and full implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

UNION DES COMORES 
Unite -Solidaritti -Developpement 
M1N1STERE DES RELAnONS EXTERlEURES ET DE LA COOPERAnON, CHARGE DE LA DIASPORA DE LA FRANCOPHONIE ET DU MONDE ARABE 
DIRECTION DES ETUDES ET PREVISION 
AUTORlTE NATIONALE DE LA CONVENTION POUR L'INTERDICTION DES ARMES CHIMIQUES ET DES ARMES DE DESTRUCTION MASSIVE 
DECLARATION DU REPRESENTANT 
DE L'UNION DES COMORES 

A 

LA XI EME SESSION ANNUELLE 
DE LA CONFERENCE DES ETATS PARTIES 

A 

LA CONVENTION SUR LES ARMES CHIMIQUES 
(5-8 DECEMBRE 2006) 

DECLARATION DU REPRESENTANT 
DE L'UNION DES COMORES 

Monsieur le President, 
Monsieur le Directeur General, 
Excellence, Honorables Delegues, 
Mesdames, Messieurs. 

Je voudrais tout d'abord, au nom de l'Union des Comores, m'associer aux delegations qui m'ont precedees, pour vous feliciter, Monsieur le President, aI'occasion de votre accession a la presidence de cette XI,me session de la Conference des Etats parties ala Convention pour l'Interdiction des Armes Chimiques. 
Je tiens avous assurer de l'appui et de la cooperation de I'Union des Comores, pour la reussite de votre presidence, et je vous souhaite pIein succes dans la direction des travaux de cette session. 
Mes felicitations vont egalement aux honorables membres du bureau de la Conference. 
Je SUlS convamcu que, sous votre direction, cette Xl erne session remportera,grace avosqualitesprofessionneliesethumaines, lesucceset la reussite escomptes. 
Je souhaite egalement salSlr cette opportunite pour feliciter le Directeur general, Monsieur ROGELlO PFIRTER, ainsi que les membres du Secretariat technique, pour les efforts meritoires qu'ils ne cessent de 
2 

deployer pour la realisation des objectifs de notre organisation, en tete desquels vient le principe de l'universalisation de I'adhesion des etats a la Convention pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques (e.LA.C). 
le tiens ales remercier pour toutes les dispositions qui ont ete prises a fin que notre Conference se deroule dans les meilleurs conditions possibles. 
Monsieur le President, 
Mon pays s'associe naturellement a la declaration prononcee au nom du groupe africain par 
S.E . 
Situe a I'entree Nord du Canal de Mozambique, a mi-chemin entre la Cote Est d~ l'Afrique et le Nord Ouest de Madagascar, au cceur de I'Ocean Indien, I'Union des Comores, mon pays, est un archipel compose de quatre 
(4) lies et plus de dix sept (17) 1I0ts. 
Avec une superficie de 2.236 km2 et une population de 728.060 habitants, il participe pour la premiere fois a cette auguste assemblee, en tant qu'etat membre de I'Organisation pour I'lnterdiction des Armes Chimiques, apres la ratification de la C.I.A.C intervenue le 10 aoilt 2006, pour parachever un processus engage par le gouvemement de l'Union, depuis Octobre 2005, date a laquelle, est tenu I'atelier sur I'universalite et la mjse en ceuvre de la Convention en Afrique, au Siege de I'Union Africaine. 
3 
Les Comores compte parmi les premIers Etats ayant appose leur signature pour marquer leur adhesion aux objectifs et aux buts de la Convention pour \' Interdiction des Armes Chimiques , le 13 janvier 1993 it Paris. 
Mon pays, n'a jamais perdu de vue, depuis, I'importance de cette Convention et la necessite d'une interdiction totale et efficace, de la mise au point, de la fabrication, de I'acquisition, du stockage, de la conservation, du transfert et de l'emploi des armes chimiques, ainsi que de 1'utilisation illegale des produits chimiques it des fins non pacifiques et de leur destruction en tant que garantie contre la menace et I'emploi d'armes chimiques en Afrique. 
C'est pour cette raison, entre autres, qu'il note avec satisfaction, les progres accomplis it ce jour en Afrique sur la voie de I'universalite et de la mise en reuvre de cet instrument de desarmement multilateral, qui s'est affirme au fil du temps, comme etant I'un des rares cadres, sinon le seul, it enregistrer des resultats palpables, sur le long et ardu sentier du desarmement et de la non-proliferation des armes de destruction massive. 
Notre Conference, cette Xleme session intervient dans un contexte intemational difficile et plutot hesitant. 
En effet, d'un cote, les questions de desarmement et de non­proliferation occupent une place prioritaire, une place de choix, dans l'agenda des Nations Unies, it cause notamment de la menace que represente la proliferation des armes de destruction massive pour la paix et 
4 

la securite intemationale; d'un autre cote, I'absence de reference aux questions des Armes de Destruction Massives et l'impasse persistante de la Conference du desarmement face au phenomene du terrorisme sous toutes ses formes, sont autant des facteurs qui n'incitent pas a l'optimisme et attestent, au contraire, de l'incertitude qui caracterise le paysage de la securite intemationale. 
Dans ce contexte, nous pensons que, cette XI erne sessIon de la Conference des Etats parties a la Convention sur les armes chimiques pourra faire ceuvre utile, en mettant, encore une fois, en relief, le role de la Convention, sa finalite, ses specificites propres, et surtout, ses atouts majeurs qui sont mis au service de la paix et de la securite intemationale avec efficience et credibilite. 
Monsieur Iti President, 
Le President de I'Union des Comores, S.E. Ahmed Abdallah Mohamed SAMBI, a resolument engage sa volonte et celle du peuple Comorien, dans cette noble bataille, pour la paix et la securite intemationale, des son investiture, en procedant a la promulgation et ala ratification des instruments juridiques intemationaux qui participent a la realisation des objectifs et des buts de l'Organisation pour l'lnterdiction des Armes Chimiques et en invitant son gouvemement a engager le processusd'adhesiondu pays, aceuxqui nelesontpasencoreet alamise en place des structures de mise en ceuvre de la Convention pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques (C.I.A.C), dont la creation de I'Autorite Nationale. 
5 

C'est ainsi que j'ai eu l'honneur, par delegation de mon Ministre S.E. Ahmed Ben SAID JAFFAR, Ministre des Relations Exterieures et de la Cooperation, responsable de I'Autorite Nationale de la Convention pour I'Interdiction des Armes Chimiques (C.I.A.C) et des Armes de Destruction Massive(A.D.), de representer l'Union des Comores acette XI erne session de la Conference des Etats parties, pour sa premiere participation, en tant qu'Etat membre. 
Monsieur le President, Monsieur le Directeur General, 
Certains progres realises, notamment dans les domaines de la science et de la technologie, entrainent la dissemination de plusieurs nouveaux agents chimiques, rendant le commerce mondial et la production industrielle, de plus en plus versatiles et difficilement controlables, et exigent, de ,ce fait, le renforcement de I'actuel regime de verification. Le tJiste exemple du deversement de certains produits toxiques, a Abidjan, Cote d'lvoire, cas non encore totalement iIlucide, justifie, si besoin est, cette crainte. 
L'Union des Comores, considere sur ce registre, qu'il est plus que necessaire de definir les regles d'un libre echange des produits chimiques et d'une meilIeur circulation de I'information scientifique, pour assurer le droitaI'usage des matieres chimiques il des fins strictement pacifiques. 
De meme, il considere que I'application de la chimie il des fins pacifiques necessite le renforcement des programmes de cooperation 
6 

intemationale de I'organisation, en vue de developper les competences nationales par les echanges d'experience et de l'expertise entre les Etats. 
11 va de soi, que ces programmes de cooperation gagneraient en pertinence et en efficacite en impliquant it la fois, les autorites nationales, le secteur prive et evidemment, les instances concemes de I'Organisation de l'lnterdiction des Armes Chimiques (O.l.A.C). 
A !'instar d'un certain nombre de pays, l'Union des Comores, ne possede pas les moyens necessaires et l'expertise requise, pour faire face it d'eventuelles utilisation d'armes chimiques, et de meme, pour s'acquitter, comme il aurait voulu, de ses engagements dans les delais impartis. 
C'est pourquoi, mon pays emet le souhait de voir dans le cadre de cette session, les pays nantis, conduire une reflexion sur les voies et moyens it rriettre en ceuvre pour faire face it des telles situations. 
A cet egard, je voudrais saisir cette opportunite pour remercier et saluer les efforts que la France consent en faveur des mesures nationales d'application de la Convention pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques, en organisant des cours de formation pour les autorites nationales, dont ]'Union des Comores a ete parmi les heureux beneficiaires cette annee 
2006. 
L'efficacite de cette cooperation exemplaire entre un Etat membre, et les instances techniques competentes de l'organisation pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques (O.l.A.C), au benefice des autorites nationales, d'autres Etats souvent necessiteux de l'experience et de l'expertise des 
7 

puissances detentrices de I'industrie et de la connaissance avancee de la chimie, est louable, it plus d'un titre. 
Cette fonnation a ete detenninante, dans les avancees du processus de ratification et les mesures de mise en ceuvre actuellement en chantier, en Union des Comores. J'ose esperer que tous les participants en ont tire autant, sinon, plus de profit de cette fonnation dont I'utilite couvre toutes les etapes de la responsabilite des Etats, confonnement aux dispositions pertinentes de la Convention pour I'interdiction des annes chimiques (C.I.A.C). 
Monsieur le President, 
Tout en reiterant son attachement aux dispositions de la Convention, mon pays tient it reaffinner son engagement infaillible it la cause de la non-proliferation des annes de destruction massive. II demeure convaincu que seule, une application sincere et responsable des engagements pris et 
une  adhesion  universelle  aux  differents  instruments  multilateraux  
pertinents,  sont  de  nature  it  garantir  une  interdiction  veritablement  
mondiale de ces annes letales.  

L'Union des Comores, signataire de la Convention pour I'interdiction des annes chimiques depuis le 13 janvier 1993, vient de la ratifier en meme temps que la Convention contre le terrorisme et la criminalite transnationale, et celle contre la corruption intemationale, entre autres. 
8 

11 deploie des efforts, dans la mesure de ces moyens, pour adapter sa legislation nationale aux dispositions de la Convention pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques (C.I.A.C) et des autres instruments pertinents, en relation avec la lutte contre la proliferation des armes de destruction massIve. 
Plus que jamais, le role et la mISSIOn de ('organisation pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques, sont indispensables pour la paix et la securite intemationale et merite le soutien et le concours de toute la communaute humaine. le ne peut conclure, alors, mon propos qu'en reaffirmant la volonte de l'Union des Comores d'a:uvrer de concert avec I'organisation pour I'interdiction des armes chimiques pour la realisation de ses nobles objectifs. 
Vive la cooperation intemationale 
le vous remercie. 
• 1!)M. Q"1I\ ~ i ~ (J7A ffr7t 
O~ 

f+1tn '/,u 
9 

EMBASSY OF THE REPUBLIC OF KOREA AND 
PERMANENT MISSION TO THE INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 

Verlengde Tolweg 8, 2517 JV The Hague 
Tel (31-70) 358 6076, Fax (31-70) 350 4712 

(Check against delivery) 
Statement By 
H.E. Amb. CHOI, Jong-moo 
Permanent Representative of 
The Republic of Korea to 
The OPCW 

At the Eleventh Session of 
the Conference of the States Parties to 
the Chemical Weapons Convention 

5 December 2006, The Hague 

Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Director-General, 
Distinguished Delegates, ladies and gentlemen, 

I would like to extend my delegation’s warm congratulations, on your assumption of the chairmanship of the Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. My delegation is confident that your astute leadership and guidance will lead this Session to a successful conclusion. I assure you of my delegation’s full support and cooperation in the future. 
My delegation also wishes to thank the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Arrospide of Peru for his outstanding contribution to the OPCW. 
(Overall Assessment of the state of the OPCW) 
Mr. Chairman, 
This year, we have made great strides in achieving the ultimate goal of the OPCW, namely the realization of the world free of chemical weapons: Possessor states have continued to destroy their chemical weapons stockpiles as committed under the Convention; The universality of the Convention has been noticeably advanced; Much progress has also been made on the national implementation of the Convention under Article VII by all States Parties.  My delegation would like to express its appreciation for the unsparing efforts of the Technical Secretariat for these accomplishments. 
Nevertheless, we still face many challenges ahead of us.  The unexpected delay of the chemical weapons destruction by major possessor states inevitably raises concern of the international community. The threat of terrorist attack using chemical weapons places the international peace and security in serious jeopardy. We also have some unresolved issues such as challenge inspection and industry cluster issues. 
- 1 -

My delegation sincerely hopes that this Session of the Conference is able to address these issues in a constructive and cooperative manner. 
(Destruction of Chemical Weapons Stockpiles) 
Mr. Chairman, 
I believe the most pressing issue on our agenda is the request by major possessor states for the extension of the deadline for a 100% destruction of their CW stockpiles. Although timely destruction is the most important obligation under the Convention, the extension of the deadline for 100% destruction up to five years as allowed by the Convention seems to be unavoidable for certain major possessor states. 
My delegation would like to see this matter concluded during this Session. The major possessor states should reassure us that the progress of the destruction will be made in a transparent and accountable manner. 
(Proposed Programme and Budget for 2007) 
Mr. Chairman, 
During this conference we have to approve the programme and budget for the next year. It is our view that it is well drafted, reflecting the pending needs of the Organization to accomplish the core objectives of the OPCW. My delegation appreciates the efforts made by the Director-General and his able staffs to enhance the efficiency in managing the Secretariat. 
In order to fully benefit from the Result-Based Budgeting adopted by this Organization, we need to evaluate the activities of the Organization thoroughly and avoid making the same errors. My delegation requests the Secretariat to ensure that evaluation results be duly informed to all States Parties for necessary feedback in preparing for future programme and budget. 
- 2 -

(Universality of the Convention) 
Mr. Chairman, 
The universal accession to the Convention will remain one of the major goals of the OPCW. Since the entry into force of the Convention less than 10 years ago, the number of States Parties has risen to 181. I would like to extend my delegation’s warm welcome to all new States Parties. My delegation also notes with delight that states such as Lebanon and Iraq will join us very soon. This shows the growing global commitment to the goal of the Convention. 
As the Universality Action Plan clearly sets the goal of reaching full universality before the tenth anniversary of the convention, we cannot be too complacent. With some dubious countries still remaining outside the CW regime, we are under serious and constant threat of chemical weapons use. So we once again urge those countries to respond to the call of the OPCW immediately and without condition.  We also encourage the Secretariat to strengthen its efforts to realize the full universality as soon as possible. 
(Implementation of Article VII Obligations) 
Mr. Chairman, 
Considerable efforts have been made this year to ensure the implementation of the Article VII obligations.  As a result, almost all States Parties have designated their National Authorities. The number of States Parties that have yet to take the legislative measures has also been reduced remarkably.   
My delegation fully endorses the extension of the last year’s decision on Article VII. Next year, we should place more emphasis on helping the States concerned adopt the required national legislation. More concerted efforts between States Parties and the Secretariat will surely be required. My delegation is ready to do its part to assist those countries. 
(Preparation for the Second Review Conference) 
Mr. Chairman, 
- 3 -

The Second Review Conference to be held in 2008 will be a unique occasion to evaluate the ten year’s experience in implementing the Convention. It will provide us with a good opportunity to examine the future challenges in the chemical weapons disarmament and non­proliferation regime.   
My delegation would like to thank the Working Group Chairman, Ambassador Parker of the United Kingdom, and other bureau members for their excellent work. We certainly have taken the right direction in our preparation for the Conference. I believe that the Chemical Industry and external bodies including NGOs will play a more active role. 
(Tenth Anniversary of the Entry into Force of the Convention) 
Mr. Chairman, 
Next year, we will commemorate our tenth anniversary. It will celebrate the accomplishments of the last ten years and serve to promote international peace and security through disarmament. 
(Chemical Industry Cluster) 
Mr. Chairman, 
By effective industry verification measures the importance of a strengthened non-proliferation regime is growing with the scientific and technological development in the chemical industry sector.  Therefore, States Parties and the Secretariat have to make more concerted efforts to improve and enhance the effectiveness of chemical industry verification by the Organization. 
In this respect, my delegation would like to draw attention to the issue of OCPF inspection. We believe that the number of inspections on the OCPF sites needs to be increased as much as possible with a view to preventing the proliferation of dangerous chemicals. This should be duly reflected on the future programme and budget. Furthermore, the rapid growth of the number of declared OCPFs clearly demonstrates that more 
- 4 -

resources should be allocated for the inspection of those sites. Meanwhile, the OCPF inspection selection methodology should be agreed on by States Parties, taking into account the three weighting factors described in the Verification Annex of the Convention. 
(Contribution to the work of the OPCW) 
Mr. Chairman, 
My government has always been and will remain a dedicated Party to the Convention. We have not only implemented our obligations under the Convention in good faith, but taken a variety of initiatives to promote the cause of the CWC. This year my government organized significant events such as the “Assistance and Protection Course” and the “Regional Seminar on Industry Cluster Issue.” 
We also made voluntary contributions in the amount of 80,000 U.S. dollars to support the activities of the Secretariat to promote the universality of the Convention as well as the implementation of the Article VII obligations. Today, I am pleased to announce that, despite budgetary constraints, Korea will be making voluntary contributions again next year. 
(Conclusion) 
Mr. Chairman, 
In closing, my delegation hopes that this Session of the Conference will provide a valuable opportunity for all of us to take stock of what we have achieved this year and consider what we have to do next year to achieve our goal, a world free of Chemical Weapons. 
Thank you. 
- 5 -

Statement  by  Ambassador  Pamela  J. Deen, Permanent Representative of Sri Lanka and the Head of the  Sri Lanka Delegation  to the 11th  Session of  the Conference of  the States Parties to the CWC 5th – 8th December, 2006 
Mr. Chairman, please allow me to join the previous speakers in extending my heartiest congratulations on your election to the Chair of the 11th Session of the Conference of the State Parties. My delegation is confident that with your experience and able leadership, we will be able to bring the proceedings of the conference to a productive conclusion. Please be assured Mr. Chairman, the fullest cooperation of my delegation in carrying out the tasks of the Conference. 
My delegation also wishes to express our gratitude to the out-going Chairman, His Excellency José Antonio Arróspide. His able guidance and skilful leadership paved the way for the successful conclusion of the 10th State Parties Conference.  We also would like to extend a warm welcome to the newly elected bureau.  
The performance of the Technical Secretariat is significant in achieving the goals of the Convention. We appreciate the efforts and guidance given to the Technical Secretariat by the Director-General Mr. Rogelio Pfirter. We also thank him for the comprehensive report presented on the activities of the OPCW. 
Mr. Chairman, with the accession of Montenegro, 181 States Parties have now joined the Convention.  Sri Lanka wishes to extend a warm welcome to those States Parties who joined the Convention since the 10th CSP. It is evident that we are drawing closer to the universality of the Convention. The efforts taken by the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat in promoting the Convention in this regard are commendable. My delegation urges the other remaining States, who have not yet ratified or acceded to the Convention to do so early, as adhering to the Convention contributes to international peace and security. It also strengthens the International efforts in preventing the proliferation of Chemical Weapons and denies the accessibility of such deadly weapons to non-State actors, including terrorists. 
We are pleased to note the progress made under the Plan of Action adopted at the 10th CSP on the Implementation of the Article VII Obligations. The assistance received by the States Parties, in addition to the Workshops and Seminars organized by the Technical Secretariat have contributed to this progress. My delegation wishes to convey its appreciation to the States Parties who supported those programmes. 
Mr. Chairman, with regard to the National Implementation Measures, my delegation is pleased to inform the Conference that the national legislation to give effect to the Chemical Weapons Convention has been finalized and the draft Bill is now before the Parliament for adoption. Provisions have also been included in the draft to have all users, manufacturers, importers and traders to register with the National Authority, in addition to obtaining permits for each import. Further measures have been taken to identify the import of scheduled chemicals and notify their arrival to the National Authority. 
In May this year, with the assistance of the OPCW, Sri Lanka conducted an awareness course for the agencies involved with the implementation of the Convention, including the private sector. A further awareness course has been planned for the benefit of the industrial sector once the Bill has been adopted by the Parliament.  In addition, at an inter-ministerial meeting held in September 2006, a decision has been taken to develop an emergency response plan for chemical emergencies. 
Mr. Chairman, as a country affected by terrorism, Sri Lanka is very much concerned of the possibility of chemical weapons falling into the hands of terrorists. In this regard, Sri Lanka welcomes the adoption of the UN Security Council resolution 1540 and the Global Counter Terrorism Strategy at the UN General Assembly this year and requests the Conference to identify further measures to prevent the non-State actors from acquiring the chemical weapons capability. My delegation urges the Conference to take measures to build capacity in the OPCW  in order to ensure speedy and effective response in case a States Party requests for assistance in the event of an attack. 
Mr. Chairman, It is our view that the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement is vital for the success of the organization as well as the participation of the Member States in the activities of the OPCW.  My delegation therefore, requests the Conference to take necessary measures for the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement fully. 
As the 10th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention is getting closer, my delegation wishes to extend its fullest cooperation to the activities planned to celebrate this important milestone.  
Mr. Chairman, last but not least Sri Lanka wishes to place on record its association with the Statement delivered by His Excellency Oscar De Los Reyes Ramos of Cuba on behalf of the NAM States Parties to the CWC and China. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
11th SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
OF THE OPCW 

STATEMENT BY 
AMBASSADOR NOOR FARIDA ARIFFIN 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA 
TO THE ORGANISATION FOR THE 
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

THE HAGUE, 6 NOVEMBER 2006 

(Please check against delivery) 
Mr. Chairman, 
1. 
Allow me first of all to congratulate you on your election to the Chair.  I am confident that with your wide experience and diplomatic skills you will guide this conference as competently and efficiently as you had chaired the Executive Council. Please be assured of the support and cooperation of Malaysia’s delegation in accomplishing your task. I wish to also congratulate the new members of the Bureau on their election and to express my delegation’s gratitude to the outgoing Chairman, His Excellency Ambassador José Antonio Arrospide for his outstanding stewardship of the 10th Conference of States Parties.  Ambassador Arrospide who will soon be completing his assignment in the Netherlands, has made many friends within the OPCW fraternity as well as the Diplomatic community in The Hague.  He will be missed by all his friends and colleagues. On behalf of my delegation I would like to wish him all the best in his future endeavours.  Our thanks are also due to the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter for his informative and comprehensive report which will greatly assist us in our deliberations this week. 

2. 
My delegation wishes to associate itself with the joint statement of the NAM CWC States Parties and China which was delivered by His Excellency Ambassador Oscar De Los Reyes Ramos of Cuba yesterday. 

Mr. Chairman, 

3. 
The membership of our organisation today stands at 181.  My delegation wishes to join the other delegations in welcoming the new member States who have joined the OPCW since the 10th CSP. The increasing number of ratifications and accessions to the CWC is an important indicator of the global acceptance of its disarmament and verification regimes. 

4. 
This impressive number is also testimony to the effective implementation of the Plan of Action on Universality. Malaysia is fully supportive of the Action Plan and the Secretariat’s efforts to implement the Plan.  In particular, Malaysia is pleased to note that the Organisation is intensifying its efforts to attract new members from regions where political tensions persist.  In this context we wish to commend the 


1 

Director-General for his efforts to promote the universality of the Convention in the Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East.  These efforts include the organisation of the regional workshop for States not party from this region which was held in Rome from 25 – 27 October 2006, personal visits to this region as well as contacts with the diplomatic missions based in The Hague and Brussels of the States concerned. We hope that these efforts will achieve the desired objective of bringing in these countries into the OPCW in the near future. 
5. 
On Malaysia’s part it has participated in many universality-related activities organised by the OPCW, such as the Asian regional meetings on National Authorities and the Meetings of National Authorities in The Hague ever since it became a State Party in May 2000. The most recent regional National Authority meeting which we participated in was the Asian regional meeting which was held in Jakarta, Indonesia from 5 - 7 September 2006. As usual we found it very useful to be able to exchange national experiences with the other participants and learn from one another. In the Asian region, the Convention has been accepted by nearly all the countries. The two notable exceptions are the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea and Myanmar. We hope that it will not be long before these two States will join the ranks of OPCW Member States. 

6. 
As we review the implementation of the Plan of Action on Article VII of the CWC, Malaysia is heartened with the progress that States Parties have made in implementing their Article VII obligations.  It is a source of satisfaction to us all that there has been a significant increase in the number of States Parties that have designated or established their National Authorities since the 10th CSP.  As at the reporting cut-off date of 29 September 2006 when there were 179 States Parties, only 9 States Parties had yet to designate or establish their National Authorities. However, according to the Director-General’s report nearly all of the States Parties concerned are taking steps to fulfil their obligation. 

7. 
The number of States Parties that have yet to enact legislation or adopt administrative measures to implement the Convention has decreased to 67 during the same period. From Malaysia’s own experience, even when a State Party has the necessary legal expertise in drafting laws, the enactment of legislation can still 


2 

be a protracted process especially in situations of competing legislative drafting priorities, the need for public consultations with relevant interest groups, and in political systems with a bicameral legislature and which requires the assent of the head of State before laws passed by the legislative body can come into force, the process may take even longer. We would therefore urge greater understanding of the different situations prevailing among States Parties.   
8. 
Malaysia is fully supportive of the approach that the Organisation is taking of providing assistance, on request, to States Parties to meet their obligations under the Action Plan. We also support the draft decision to extend for another year the provisions of C-10/DEC.16.  We are confident that with the present pro-active approach adopted by the Secretariat to make contact with each and every one of the States Parties concerned to offer technical assistance in drafting or offering comments on draft legislation as directed by the 10th CSP, the number of States Parties who are lagging behind will steadily decrease. 

9. 
Malaysia has benefited from such assistance from the Secretariat in the preparation of its implementing legislation which meets all the criteria used by the Secretariat. The Secretariat’s comments on our draft legislation was extremely helpful. Our Chemical Weapons Convention Act came into force on 1 September this year. The Act will greatly facilitate our efforts to implement our obligations under the Convention fully and effectively. We are pleased to note that in Appendix I to the Director-General’s report on the status of implementation of Article VII of the Convention by States Parties,  Malaysia has satisfied all the indicators used in the reports on the Article VII Plan of Action. We wish to place on record our gratitude to the Secretariat for the valuable support and assistance rendered in the preparation of our implementing legislation as well as in the capacity building of our National Authority. 

10. 
Malaysia is supportive of the OPCW’s efforts to oversee the implementation of the Convention.  We consider it important to facilitate the work of the OPCW especially in areas where we can make a contribution.  In this regard Malaysia was pleased to co-organise with the Secretariat an Asian regional meeting on Assistance and Protection against Chemical Weapons which was held in Kuala Lumpur from 8 – 


3 

12 May 2005. A total of 83 participants from 17 Asian countries as well as 5 resource persons from the Secretariat participated in the meeting.   
Mr. Chairman, 
11. 
The destruction of chemical weapons and associated facilities is the central objective of the CWC. Although we understand and appreciate the difficulties and challenges faced by some possessor States in meeting their destruction deadlines, we nevertheless believe that it is important for the credibility of the Convention that possessor States should do their utmost in ensuring that the final deadline of 2012 is met. 

12. 
Malaysia is pleased to note the report of the Director-General that in the three years since the tenure policy has been implemented, initial problems encountered have been largely overcome and that there has been no noticeable decline in the degree of professionalism of staff in general.  We are also pleased to note that an unexpected benefit of the policy on tenure has been to bring the Secretariat closer to meeting the goal of broader geographical representation and gender balance of its staff. Malaysia also believes that where circumstances require, policies should be adjusted to accommodate new and unanticipated developments. In the case of the tenure policy we are of the view that the Director-General’s exceptional authority to extend staff member’s contracts beyond the seven years total length of service provided for in staff Regulation 4.4 (b), should be extended to 29 April 2012, in order to avoid compromising the operational effectiveness of the OPCW. The extension of the Director-General’s exceptional authority to the aforementioned date is logical given the April 2012 final destruction deadline established under the Convention. Malaysia is therefore happy to support the Draft Decision on the future implementation of the tenure policy. 

13. 
On administrative and financial issues, we wish to commend the Secretariat on the cost-saving measures that it has adopted in carrying out its activities in 2006. With respect to the proposed programme and budget for 2007, whilst Malaysia welcomes a zero nominal growth budget, we do not see the usefulness of a reduced budget, in this case, a reduction of 1.7 percent in real terms.  In Malaysia’s view, the 


4 

savings resulting from cost-saving measures could be more usefully channelled to ICA programmes and activities, particularly capacity-building activities to assist developing States Parties in fully implementing the provisions of the Convention.     
Mr. Chairman, 
14. 
I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Director of the International Cooperation and Assistance Division, Mr. John Makhubalo, who will be leaving the Secretariat early next year.  During his tenure, Mr. Makhubalo has succeeded in building this division into a strong and effective deliverer of ICA programmes and services which have benefited so many States Parties including my own country. We wish him well in his new career. 

15. 
In concluding, I wish to reiterate Malaysia’s commitment to the goals of the Convention and our determination to work with other States Parties and the policy making organs of the OPCW to ensure the effective implementation of the Convention. 


5 

ELEVENTH SESSION  OF THE 
CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE CWC 

STATEMENT BY 
H.E. AMBASSADOR OSCAR DE LOS REYES RAMOS  
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE REPUBLIC OF CUBA 
TO THE ORGANISATION FOR THE  
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS  
ON BEHALF OF THE STATES PARTIES  
OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT TO THE 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION, AND CHINA 

THE HAGUE, 5 DECEMBER 2006 
(Please check against delivery) 
Mr. Chairman, 
1. 
On behalf of the Members of the Non-Aligned Movement who are States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention and China, I congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this 11th Conference of States Parties.  We are confident that under your experienced and skilful leadership, the Conference will be steered to a successful conclusion.  

2. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to thank the outgoing Chairman,  Ambassador José Antonio Arróspide  for his excellent chairmanship of the Tenth Conference of States Parties. His able guidance and leadership abilities contributed to the success of the Conference.  I wish to also congratulate the newly elected Bureau members of this 11th Session of the Conference. 

3. 
I wish to express our gratitude to the Director General, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter for the presentation of his clear and comprehensive report which shall greatly facilitate the deliberations of this Conference. 


Mr. Chairman, 
4. The existence of weapons of mass destruction poses a serious threat to international peace and security.  The NAM CWC States 
2 

Parties and China are committed to the full, effective and non­discriminatory implementation of the Convention and call for the prohibition and total elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction in line with the first preambular paragraph of the Convention. 
5. 
In this regard, the NAM CWC States Parties and China wish to reaffirm and reiterate the long-standing principled positions of the Movement on disarmament and international security, including the decisions taken at the XIV Summit of the Movement, which took place last September, in Havana, Cuba.  

6. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China express our deepest concern about the current pace of the destruction process. We reaffirm that all of the provisions of the Convention must be upheld to the letter. This equally applies to the deadline set for the destruction of chemical weapons. In this spirit the NAM CWC States Parties and China call on all possessor States to make every effort to comply with the deadlines stipulated under the Convention for the destruction of chemical weapons. We strongly support the view that it is imperative for major possessor states to fully commit to the preservation of the integrity and credibility of the CWC and to strictly comply with the 2012 final deadline for the destruction of chemical weapons.  Mr. Chairman, 

7. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China reiterate their call to developed countries to promote international cooperation 


3 

through the transfer of technology, material and equipment for peaceful purposes in the chemical field and the removal of all and any discriminatory restrictions that are contrary to the letter and spirit of the Convention. A decade of operation of the CWC has demonstrated that developing countries who are States Parties to the convention have implemented their obligations in good faith. In this regard, NAM CWC States Parties and China strongly believe that undue restrictions amongst States Parties on exchange of technology, materials and equipment for peaceful purposes are against both the letter and spirit of the Convention and affect its long term viability. It is fundamental to ensure the removal of and to prevent the imposition of any discriminatory restriction on access to materials, equipment and technology required by developing States Parties to the Convention for their continued and peaceful development.  NAM CWC States Parties and China strongly emphasizes that it is now time to fulfil the solemn undertakings given at the time of the Convention's adoption for removal of unwarranted restrictions in the field of trade in chemicals, equipment and related technologies for peaceful purposes. 
8. 
NAM CWC States Parties and China emphasize once again that the objectives of the Convention can be best addressed through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive and non- discriminatory agreements by all CWC States Parties. 

9. 
We reiterate our conviction that facilitation of and participation in the fullest possible exchanges and enhanced 


4 

international cooperation in the field of peaceful chemical activities, aimed at facilitating economic and social development, is a vital element in strengthening implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We recall that the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of the provisions of international cooperation contribute to the universality of the Convention. The NAM CWC States Parties and China attach great importance to the full implementation of Article XI of the Convention and to the fostering of international cooperation for peaceful purposes in the field of chemical activities. However, we note with concern that there has been little follow-up on the decision adopted on Article XI at the 10th CSP and that it will not be examined in depth at the 11th Conference. We wish to reiterate that the Conference should mandate the Executive Council to approve and Action Plan for the effective implementation of Article XI by the next Session of the Conference. 
Mr. Chairman, 
10. 
Since the Tenth Session of the Conference more countries have joined the Chemical Weapons Convention.  It is truly a pleasure to extend a warm welcome to the Central African Republic, Comoros, Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia and Montenegro.    The Organisation has now 181 States Parties, a figure that sets it closer to the goal of universal adherence to the Convention.  

11. 
The CWC is one of the very few disarmament multilateral treaties banning a whole category of weapons of mass destruction. Consequently, we believe that the effective contribution of the Convention to international and regional peace and security would be enhanced through universal adherence to the Convention. The NAM CWC States Members and China wish to express our appreciation to the States Parties which have contributed to universality-related activities.  We likewise commend the Technical Secretariat for continuously intensifying its efforts to promote the universality of the Convention, which is fundamental for the attainment of its purposes. The NAM CWC States Members and China recognise the importance of enhancing the results of the Action Plan that have been achieved and strongly encourage States Parties to continue their efforts in pursuit of its goals.  We urge all States that have still not joined the Convention to do so without further delay, in particular those States whose non-adherence has given rise to serious concerns.  

12. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China feel that the contribution to global anti-terrorism efforts in the context of the Chemical Weapons Convention can be best achieved by striving for full and effective implementation of all provisions of the Convention. In this regard, the promotion of the universality of the convention is of particular importance. 

13. 
This 11th Session will be undertaking a review of the Plan of Action on the implementation of Article VII. The progress 


5 

6 

achieved since the adoption of the Plan of Action and the follow-up of Decision16 of CSP/10 bears testimony to its success. We are convinced that through the provision of meaningful assistance and technical support to States Parties, at their request, the objectives of Dec. 16 can be more effectively realised. 
14. 
We continue to support a constructive and cooperative approach and encourage all States Parties and the Technical Secretariat to devise appropriate solutions to overcome the difficulties encountered by individual States Parties in the implementation of the Plan of Action. 

Mr. Chairman, 

15. 
The Draft Budget of the Organisation for 2007 is one of the main agenda items and - consequently- the States Parties have dedicated considerable time and efforts to the deliberations on this topic since June 2006.    The NAM CWC States Parties and China look forward to the successful conclusion of discussions on this issue. 

16. 
We reiterate that in the interest of the effective operation of the OPCW, proper allocations in the regular budget for key programmes and activities remain essential.  The international cooperation programmes are a core element in the implementation of the Convention.  Enhanced ICA programmes and activities and the corresponding provision of sufficient 


7 

resources in the regular budget are therefore of fundamental importance, particularly in the domain of capacity building.  
17. 
The verification measures of the Convention play an important role for the credibility of the implementation of all provisions of the Convention. The NAM CWC States Parties and China emphasize  that the principle that establishes that facilities posing most risk to the object and purpose of the Convention retain the central attention of the verification measures, must be consistently upheld. Therefore, we underscore anew that the verification regime under Article VI should correspond to the hierarchy of risks inherent to the respective category of chemicals.   

18. 
While recognising the financial difficulties faced by States Parties that are in arrears, we welcome the draft decision aimed at encouraging those States Parties to regularise the payment of their outstanding contributions.  

19. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China reaffirm the importance of Article X of the Convention, and of the activities of the OPCW to maintain and develop a state of readiness to provide timely, adequate and effective assistance to Member States in situations of use or threat of use of Chemical Weapons against them. We urge all States Parties to fully implement their obligations under Article X including the enhancement of the voluntary fund for assistance.   

20. 
We reiterate our support to the efforts of the African Group for the establishment of an OPCW Office in Africa and recognize the endeavors of the facilitator and of the Technical Secretariat in this regard. The NAM CWC States Parties and China urge the Working Group established pursuant to the recommendation of the 10th CSP to conclude its deliberations with a positive and constructive recommendation by the 12th Conference of States Parties. 

21. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China support the recommendation to establish a Committee on relations with the Host Country. We welcome and support the decision that has been drafted for this XI CSP. Under this perspective, we look forward to the early solution of the outstanding issues pertaining to the implementation of the Headquarters Agreement. 

22. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China support the Draft Decision on tenure policy for the consideration of this Session of the Conference of States Parties. 

23. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China are aware of the fact that the extension of the exceptional authority requested by the Director General is aimed primarily at avoiding any adverse operational impact on the activities of the Technical Secretariat. We expect that the tenure policy be fully implemented by the DG by 29th April 2012.   We further emphasize that the employment of personnel in the Technical Secretariat must continue to be fair and transparent, paying due regard to the importance of 


8 

9 

recruiting staff on the basis of an equitable geographical distribution. 
24. 
We recognize the work that has been done so far in the preparations for the 2nd Review Conference and express our determination to participate constructively in this process.  

25. 
The NAM CWC States Parties and China express their commitment to actively participate in the preparations towards the Tenth Anniversary of the entry into force of the Convention. This will be an important occasion to reiterate our determination to build a world free of Chemical Weapons. It  will also serve to promote greater awareness of and wider knowledge about the CWC and the OPCW”. 

Finally, Mr. Chairman, 

26. 
It is the clear wish of the NAM CWC States Parties and China to renew the assurances of our fullest cooperation to you and to all other Member States in ensuring the success of this Conference. 


Thank you. 
10 


NIGERIAN STATEMENTS 

TO THE 

CONFERENCE OF STATE PARTIES 5-8 DECEMBER, 2006 
DELIVERED BY 
H. E. PROF. (MRS.) MARY N. LAR 

PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF NIGERIA 
TO THE OPCW AND AMBASSADOR OF NIGERIA 
TO THE ROYAL KINGDOM OF NETHERLANDS 

Mr. Chairman, 
Your Excellency, 
The Director-General (OPCW), 
Distinguished delegates, 

Let me begin Mr. Chairman by congratulating you, on behalf of my country's delegation, on your election as Chairman of the Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties. The Nigerian delegation is confident that your experience and skill on matters of disarmament will be brought to bear on this conference. 
Permit me Mr. Chairman to commend your predecessor, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide of Peru for the very effective manner he steered the Organization during his tenure. It is our hope that the conference will continue to draw from his wealth of experience. 
My country's delegation would also wish to acknowledge the candour,. efficiency and dynamism with which the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pferter has steered the work of the Technical Secretariat. We salute you and your team of technocrats. 
Mr. Chairman, Nigeria fully subscribes to the 
statements delivered by the distinguished Ambassadors of 
2 

Cuba and Algeria on behalf of NAM and the African Group respectively. Nigeria, which is a non-possessor of Chemical Weapons, has stood firm in Its commitment to the promotion of the provisions of the ONC, especially in Africa. We therefore take great satisfaction In the remarkable progress being made on the universality of the Convention. In this regard, we welcome all the new States Parties to the Convention, and appeal to those States that are not yet party to the ONC, especially those States in Africa, to join as soon as possible. We are convinced that it is the surest way of tackling the menace of weapons of mass destruction, particularly chemical weapons, in order to guaranty our collective security. In this connection, my country's delegation would wish to stress the importance of States Parties compliance with the provisions of the CWC particularly with the deadlines set by the policy-making organs of the OPON on the destruction of existing chemical weapons by possessor States. 
Mr. Chairman, Nigeria on her part, has continued to maintain transparency and a spirit of close collaboration and cooperation in Its dealings with the OPCW, by providing all necessary information on its activities as required by the Organization. I am sure that many of the distinguished 
3 
delegates are aware of the initial inspection conducted by OPCW early this year on a declared plant site in Nigeria where a Schedule "2" Chemical TDG was being used. Although the company stopped production in 2004, it was able to provide overwhelming evidence to prove that the declared quantity of imported scheduled chemical was fully utilized. The OPCW Inspection Team did not find any indication of diversion of the chemical for any purposes not permitted by the CWe. . 
Mr. Chairman, the National Authority of Nigeria, in line with the demands of the OPCW, has continued to educate and sensitize the respective stakeholders and the general public on the CWC several Workshops and Seminars have been organized by us, while our Representatives have attended several courses/workshops under the auspices of the OPCW. All these efforts, no doubt, are aimed at strengthening our implementation strategy. Nigeria is also at the final stage in its efforts to fully domesticate the CWC, as the draft Bill on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons is currently receiving the attention of the Nigerian National Legislative Assembly. 
Mr. Chairman, Nigeria, and indeed the African Group, have continued to advocate the establishment of an OPCW 
4 

African Regional Office, in the firm conviction that such an office will be helpful to many African countries in overcoming the challenges confronting them in the implementation of the various provisions of ONC, such as Article VII. We also see such the proposed office as an effective mechanism to engage and work with the African Union and sub-regional organizations for the realization of the objectives of the ONC. The office will also help to ease the administrative bottleneck presently being experienced by the African Regional Authorities in their efforts to fully identify with the OPON. In addition, the office will attend to the peculiar needs of the African States Parties and thereby maximize the benefits of the ONC in the region. Mr. Chairman, Nigeria is aware that an ad hoc open-ended Working Group is examining the administrative, legal and financial aspects of the proposal. We hope that the Conference of the States Parties will take concrete action to finalise the matter sooner than we expect. 
Mr. Chairman, Nigeria will continue to ask for fair representation in the Technical Secretariat, Without, however, compromising standards. We therefore insist on a recruitment process that will instill confidence among all the regions that constitute the organization. Nigeria will also 
5 
request adequate funding of the activities of the International Cooperation and Assistance Division of the Technical Secretariat in order to improve on Its support efforts to the developing States in the implementation of the 
, provisions of the Convention. Let give the assurance that 
Nigeria will continue to support the work of the Technical 
, 
Secretariat in order to enable it achieve its objectives. We also want to appreciate the unparallel 'contributions 
,
, 
of the outgoing Director, lCA Dr. Mukhabalo to the Technical Secretariat and to wish him well in his retirement. We 
, declare our support for his successor, Her EXcellency the 
Ambassador of Kenya to the Netherlands. 
, Mr. Chairman, it is with great pleasure that, on behalf of the Nigerian delegation, I wish the 11th Se~sion of the Conference of the States Parties smooth, fulfilling and fruitful deliberations. 
Thank you. 
6 

Final version/051206 
Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
11th Conference of the States Parties 
The Hague, 5 - 8 December 2006 
Statement by H.E. Eva Bugge, Ambassador of Norway 
Mr. Chairperson, 
Allow me to congratulate you on your election as Chairperson of the Eleventh Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. I am confident that we will be able to fully achieve our objectives under your able leadership and guidance. I wish to assure you of this delegation’s full support and cooperation in the discharge of your responsibilities. 
Mr. Chairperson, 
I would like to take this opportunity to highlight a few points of special importance to Norway. 
Firstly, a prime objective of the Chemical Weapons Convention is the destruction of the world’s chemical weapons. When we have achieved this goal, we will have eliminated a whole category of weapons of mass destruction.  
The destruction of chemical weapons is a challenging task. We must ensure that all chemical weapons are disposed of in a timely, safe and secure manner before the deadline set out in the Convention. This is in the interests of all states. We must ensure that the 2012 deadline, which according to the Convention is the last possible deadline, is kept. In this regard Norway urges all possessor states to do their utmost to fulfil their obligations under the Convention. We also urge full transparency on destruction activities, both ongoing and planned.  
Norway is aware of the particular problems facing the Russian Federation in the construction of the necessary destruction facilities. We realise the complexity and high costs involved when chemical weapons are being destroyed. That is why we have supported the destruction activities in the Russian Federation financially. 
Secondly, another issue of great importance is the universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention. In Norway’s view, it is very positive that the number of signatories to the Convention has continued to grow since last year’s Conference of States Parties. This is important and must continue, not least because some of the states that have not joined the OPCW are in parts of the world where there is political tension. 
Universal adherence is key to the effectiveness of the Convention. In order to ensure the ultimate success of the Chemical Weapons Convention, we must encourage and assist States in the process of signing, ratifying and implementing it. We must also eliminate any possible disincentives for new States to join the convention.  
Thirdly, national implementation of the obligations under the convention is another important issue. Universality will not help if States Parties are not able to fulfil their commitments under the Convention. Norway is therefore pleased with the decision made to establish, on a temporary basis, an office of the OPCW in Africa. We recognise the contribution such an office could make to the universality of the Convention and to national implementation in Africa. 
Mr. Chairperson, 
Norway attaches the greatest importance to the inspection regime under the Convention and the work being done by the OPCW Technical Secretariat. We thus welcome the efforts to implement Section B of Part IX of the Verification Annex regarding modification of the methodology for selection of OCPF plants. In our view a revision of the current methodology is long overdue, given the need to achieve a more equitable geographical distribution.  
Credible monitoring of compliance must also include the use of challenge inspections in relevant circumstances. We thus welcome the efforts by the Technical Secretariat to maintain its preparedness to conduct challenge inspections, as well as its advocacy role in promoting the readiness of the States Parties to receive challenge inspections if so requested in accordance with Article IX of the Convention.  
Inspections cost money. However, since inspections are so important for achieving our goals, we must be able to finance them. We support the proposal for increased inspection of OCPFs. In order to finance inspections and other important activities by the OPCW, we encourage those States Parties that have not done so to pay their assessed contributions in full and on time. We also consider it important that the OPCW’s budgets reflect its level of activities.  
Mr. Chairperson, 
In May next year, we will celebrate the OPCW’s tenth anniversary. We look forward to this opportunity to mark our progress. The main message should be twofold: We are making headway towards our goal of eliminating a whole category of weapons of mass destruction. But constant vigilance is also needed to ensure that chemical weapons are never used again.  
Thank you. 
Statement by Mrs. Ambika Devi Luintel, Charge’ d’ Affaires a.i, Mission of 
Nepal and Leader of the Nepalese Delegation to the 11th Session of the 
Conference of States Parties 05-08 December 2006 in The Hague, the 
Netherlands. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Director General, 
Excellencies, 
Distinguished Delegates, 

At the outset, please allow me, on behalf of the Nepalese Delegation, to join the previous speakers in congratulating you on your unanimous election as the Chairperson of the 11th Session of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). I am confident that your outstanding professional skill and leadership would help steer the session to a fruitful conclusion and I assure you full cooperation from my delegation. 
I would also like to express my sincere gratitude to H.E.  Jose Antonio Arrospide, the Chairperson of the 10th Session of the Conference of States Parties for  his guidance and wise leadership which enabled the States Parties to conclude a productive conference last year and would like to congratulate to the new Bureau members of this Session of the Conference. 
Let me also take this opportunity to express my sincere thanks to Ambassdor Rogelio Pfirter, Director General of OPCW, for his comprehensive statement  which, I am confident, will guide the deliberations of this Conference.  
My Delegation supports the views expressed by H.E Ambassador of Cuba on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China yesterday. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Nepal extends warm welcome to all six new countries (Central African Republic, Comoros, Djibouti, Liberia, Haiti and Montenegro) that have become States Parties since 10th Session of the Conference of States Parties to the CWC. It believes that growing number of States Parties to the CWC, is a testimony of the desire of the international community to get rid of chemical weapons for a safer and more peaceful world.  My delegation is very pleased to note that within a short span of nine years since its entry into force in 1997, the CWC has already attracted 181 Members and we are very close to attaining the goal of Universality. We urge remaining countries to join the Convention as early as possible. It is our strong believe that the commitment to the CWC would help secure peace in the world. Let’s work together to eliminate the horrendous means of destruction. The excellent work done by the Technical Secretariat to promote the universality of the Convention is highly commendable and we sincerely hope that it will continue to intensify its efforts in the same direction in the future as well. 
The proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) has caused serious threat to humankind. The danger of acquisition and possible use of WMD by terrorists pose serious challenge to the international community. To avoid catastrophe of WMD, global community should come forward to realize the international disarmament regime. Nepal supports for the universality of the Convention and calls for greater international technical and economic cooperation to support the National Authority for their capacity building to implement the provisions of the Convention.  
Nepal, as a Party to CWC, is committed to the provisions stipulated in the Convention. We have always extended our full cooperation with the international community to achieve full ban on the production, use, stockpiling and proliferation of the chemical weapons. The full implementation of the CWC will significantly contribute to achieve the disarmament goals. Nepal has always taken the position on total disarmament, including Chemical Weapons in time-bound framework and has expressed its faith unfathomable to the UN Charter and signed several international treaties related to disarmament. While advocating for peace and disarmament, Nepal has been party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty (NPT) and has also signed the Comprehensive Nuclear Test-Ban Treaty (CTBT). 
Nepal believes that the Regional Meetings of National Authorities, organized in various geographical regions, have significantly contributed to the fostering of greater understanding and cooperation through exchange of expertise, sharing of experiences and exchange of new ideas among the countries in the regions. The Regional Meetings held in Singapore in 2003, Beijing in 2004, Tehran in September 2005 and Jakarta in 2006 have been found useful and productive to the National Authorities of Asian Countries. Nepal has been participating in such Regional meetings and will continue to take part in the activities of the OPCW both at regional and international level. 
As a State Party to the CWC, Nepal is engaged in the implementation of the CWC provisions at the national level. A National Authority under the Convenorship of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs was established in August 1998. The authority is responsible to carryout the activities set out in the Convention. A sub-committee of legal experts established under the National Authority has recently submitted a copy of draft legislation on the implementation of the provision of the Convention to the National Authority for their consideration. Nepal submitted the Initial Declaration on 16 February 1998.  
Nepal has also been cooperating with OPCW by providing necessary information such as contact numbers where to send notifications and other issues, designated point of entry for inspection, standing diplomatic clearance number for non-scheduled aircraft and radio frequencies to facilitate the inspection. 
Nepal has responded to the various questionnaires regarding various aspects of the implementation of the Convention. In February 2005, Nepal hosted a training programme in Kathmandu for the members of the National Authority to familiarize various practical, technical and legal aspects of the Convention with the cooperation of the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW. Similarly, a sub-regional workshop for Custom authorities in South Asia on technical aspects of the Transfers regime was held in Kathmandu from 9 to 10 August 2006. Custom authorities from various countries such as India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Myanmar, Sri Lanka, Iran, Maldives, China and European Commission attended the Seminar. 
Nepal, being a party to CWC, has the obligation to facilitate the Inspectors for their movement with equipments for verification and inspection activities (Part II, General Rules of Verification and approved equipment 27). In this context, Foreign Ministry (Convener of the Committee of National authority) coordinated with the Department of Mines and Geology and Department of Standard and Metrology to fill and send back the form of Authorization for shipment of new radioactive sources as specified by Operation and Planning Branch of OPCW Head Quarters in October 2006.  Nepal has responded to the queries by the Technical Secretariat on the confidentiality matter. 
In the Programme and Budget of the organization, Nepal has taken note of zero nominal growth budget proposal and reduction of assessed contributions by States Parties. However, essential programmes and activities of the Organization particularly designed for the enhancement of the capacity of the Developing countries particularly of the LDCs should remain intact.  
Let me  conclude my statement by emphasizing that full, effective and non- discriminatory implementation of the provisions of the CWC not only help achieve the goal of Universality of the Convention but also help create a safer and peaceful world for the entire humankind . I am confident that this 11th Session of the Conference of the States Parties will prove to be instrumental in further consolidating our efforts towards achieving the ultimate goals of a chemical weapons-free world. 
Thank you. 06 December 2006 
11TH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION  

NEW ZEALAND STATEMENT 

The Hague 
5 December 2006 

Delivered by New Zealand Acting 
Permanent Representative to the OPCW, 
Juliet Hay 

It is with great pleasure that I address this 11th Conference of the States Parties and welcome you in the chair. You have this delegation’s full support. 
This year has brought a mixture of challenges and opportunities in the disarmament and international security realm.  For New Zealand the primary goal remains the complete, verifiable, and irreversible elimination of weapons of mass destruction.  In our view it is more important than ever to work towards this goal through a strong framework of multilateral agreements with verification provisions.  The Chemical Weapons Convention already has a key position in this framework.  By outlawing chemical weapons completely for all states parties, setting deadlines for the complete destruction of existing stockpiles, and providing for verification, it sets a standard that we would like to see emulated in other contexts. 
2007 marks the 10th anniversary of the Convention’s entry into force.  It will provide an opportunity to reflect on the achievements of the last decade.  But while much has indeed been achieved it is not yet time to rest on our laurels.  For all its successes, including near universality with the increase this year to 181 states parties, this organisation still has challenges to face if it is to achieve its principal goal of eliminating an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. 
Before this Conference are several requests from possessor states for extensions to deadlines for the destruction of their chemical weapon stockpiles.  Two seek extensions to 2012, the latest date permitted under the Convention.  These requests go to the heart of this Convention.  They cannot be granted lightly.  It is important that any extension be for the minimum period necessary to complete destruction consistent with the legal obligations to which possessor states are subject. This is essential for the credibility of the Convention.  We recognise, however, that destruction is a technically demanding, time consuming, and expensive process that presents considerable challenges, especially for possessors with large stockpiles.  But where extensions are granted there needs to be a clear understanding that possessor states should make every effort to complete destruction more quickly if that is possible. 
New Zealand has contributed to the goal of destruction by funding a G8 Global Partnership project at the Shchuch’ye destruction facility in the Russian Federation.  This project, which was conducted under the umbrella of the arrangement between the United Kingdom and Russia, involved the reconstruction of the Puktysh electrical substation.  The work has now been completed and the substation, which also serves the local community, was formally handed back to the Russian authorities last week.  We wish to take this opportunity to express appreciation to the United Kingdom for facilitating our involvement.  We are now investigating options for future New Zealand contributions.   
An important component of this organisation’s contribution to non-proliferation is its function of monitoring and inspecting industrial facilities.  New Zealand is in the unusual position of having had all its facilities inspected.  These inspections confirmed what we already thought to be the case -that there are no matters of concern arising with our facilities.  There are, however, many facilities in other countries that have not yet been inspected and about which we do not have a similar level of assurance.  For this reason we have supported the proposal made in the budget context for an increase in the number of inspections of “other chemical production facilities”. While we would have preferred the increase to be at the level that the Technical Secretariat originally proposed we are aware that this causes some states concern. We trust that a compromise will be found during the course of this week that will both meet these concerns and also represent a real improvement on the status quo. 
As the number of OCPF inspections increases it becomes even more important to have a credible and fair methodology of site selection. For this delegation the facilitator’s latest proposal represents a pragmatic compromise that we can accept.  We urge others to work through their remaining areas of concern as a matter of priority so that a decision can be taken next year.   
Looking ahead we would support further work being done to explore ways to improve the information provided in declarations.  With the number of OCPF sites continuing to grow, and the reality that only a handful can be inspected each year, this information is critical to risk assessment.   
Another important area of work relates to implementation of the Convention. Since the Plan of Action on Article VII obligations was adopted, real progress has been made. New Zealand certainly wants this momentum to continue.  We are pleased therefore that the decision taken at CSP10 is to be extended for a further year. In our view, the approach in that decision, with its emphasis on cooperation and assistance is a positive one that has produced tangible results.   
New Zealand has made two voluntary contributions in the course of this year which have paved the way for in-country technical assistance visits in our own region. We are pleased therefore that all Pacific Island countries have now established their national authorities and most have draft legislation.  The challenge for them now is to progress the draft through the legislative process, something that can take time in any country. 
In measuring progress over the next year we need to take into account the realities in the countries concerned.  Many states that have not fully yet implemented the Convention have small bureaucracies, few resources, and many competing priorities. Some still need appropriately targeted assistance with implementation of the complex obligations in the Convention.  We trust that the Technical Secretariat will continue its outreach in different regions in 2007.   
Over the next year our preparations for Second Review Conference in 2008 will intensify.  The Review Conference will give states the opportunity to evaluate the Convention’s ability to meet contemporary challenges including developments in science and technology, and the threat of terrorist acquisition of toxic chemicals.  We should look for ways to ensure the Convention will remain relevant and effective in the twenty-first century. 
We are looking forward to a productive Conference in the days ahead under your able chairmanship. Thank you. 
STATEMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 11TH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATE PARTIES (CSP) 
BY H.E. AMBASSADOR ROMEO A. ARGUELLES 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PHILIPPINES 
TO THE ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

The Hague, 6 December 2006 

MR. CHAIRMAN, 
I JOIN EVERYONE PRESENT TODAY IN CONGRATULATING YOU AMBASSADOR DASTIS ON YOUR ELECTION AS THE CHAIRMAN OF THIS YEAR’S SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES. AS ONE OF THE ELECTED VICE CHAIRPERSONS OF THIS CONFERENCE, LET ME ASSURE YOU, AT THIS EARLY STAGE IN MY SPEECH, OF MY DELEGATION’S FULL SUPPORT AND COOPERATION IN ATTAINING A SUCCESSFUL OUTCOME OF THIS CONFERENCE. 
MY DELEGATION’S CONGRATULATIONS ALSO GO TO AMBASSADOR JOSE ANTONIO ARROSPIDE OF PERU FOR, WHAT I PERSONALLY RECALL, WAS A TRULY EXCELLENT CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE 10TH CSP. ALL OF US HERE AT OPCW, THE SECRETARIAT AND THE STATE PARTIES, WILL SURELY MISS AMBASSADOR ARROSPIDE’S SUPERIOR DIPLOMATIC AND NEGOTIATING SKILLS WHEN HE GOES BACK TO LIMA. I WISH YOU ALL THE BEST, AMBASSADOR ARROSPIDE. 
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO CONGRATULATE AMBASSADOR MKHIZE OF SOUTH AFRICA, WHOSE ABLE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, GUIDED US THROUGH MANY IMPORTANT DISCUSSIONS ON MANY CORE ISSUES IN THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION.   
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
MY DELEGATION LAUDS THE DIRECTOR GENERAL, AMBASSADOR ROGELIO PFIRTER, FOR HIS CONTINUOUS EFFECTIVE GUIDANCE TO ALL OF US IN OUR COMMON GOAL OF MAKING THIS WORLD A MORE SECURED PLACE THROUGH THE ELIMINATION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS. I WISH TO THANK HIM FOR HIS INFORMATIVE STATEMENT YESTERDAY ON THE CURRENT STATE OF AFFAIRS WITHIN THE OPCW.   
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
THIS DELEGATION WOULD LIKE TO ECHO WHAT HAS ALREADY BEEN SAID BY MANY BEFORE ME AND WILL DEFINITELY BE ADDRESSED BY MANY AFTER ME. THE DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS STOCKPILES REMAINS THE PRIMARY GOAL OF THE CONVENTION. IT IS TO THE BEST INTEREST OF HUMANITY THAT CHEMICAL WEAPONS BE TOTALLY ELIMINATED. IT IS THEREFORE A CONCERN TO THIS DELEGATION THAT MAJOR POSSESSORS ARE FALLING BEHIND THEIR DESTRUCTION DEADLINES. WE HAVE HEARD AND NOTED, WITH UNDERSTANDING, THE CHALLENGES THAT ARE BEING FACED BY THE POSSESSOR STATES. NEVERTHELESS, WE JOIN MANY IN URGING THEM TO ADHERE TO THE DEADLINE SET FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS.  
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
AS A VITAL CONTRIBUTION TO WORLD PEACE AND SECURITY, THE PHILIPPINES FULLY RECOGNIZES THE IMPORTANCE OF ACHIEVING UNIVERSAL ADHERENCE TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION. IT IS FOR THIS REASON THAT THIS DELEGATION WARMLY WELCOMES THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC, COMOROS, DJIBOUTI, HAITI, LIBERIA AND MONTENEGRO. THEIR ENTRY, AFTER THE 10TH SESSION OF THIS CONFERENCE, HAS INCREASED THE NUMBER OF STATES PARTIES TO 181 AND HAS BROUGHT THIS ORGANIZATION CLOSER TO ITS GOAL OF UNIVERSALITY. 
THIS DELEGATION IS CONVINCED THAT THE REMAINING 14 STATES THAT ARE NOT YET PARTY TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC) SHOULD CONTINUOUSLY BE ENCOURAGED TO JOIN THE CONVENTION. WE ARE FULLY SUPPORTIVE OF THE ENERGETIC EFFORTS OF THE SECRETARIAT AND SOME STATES PARTIES IN ATTAINING THE IMPORTANT AIM OF UNIVERSAL ADHERENCE.  
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
IT IS MY PLEASURE TO INFORM ALL PRESENT TODAY THAT, AFTER A LOT OF HARD WORK, THE PHILIPPINES HAS RECENTLY SUBMITTED TO BOTH ITS SENATE AND THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OUR DRAFT NATIONAL LEGISLATION ON THE CONVENTION.  
THIS POSITIVE DEVELOPMENT - AND ALL THE WORK THAT WAS PUT INTO IT - SHOWCASES THE PHILIPPINE’S COMMITMENT TO COMPLY WITH ITS OBLIGATIONS IN THE CONVENTION. I HAVE TO MENTION THAT IN DRAFTING THE PHILIPPINE LEGISLATION, WE RECEIVED VITAL ASSISTANCE FROM THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT. FOR THIS, WE ARE GRATEFUL.  
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
TO FURTHER ELABORATE ON OUR EFFORTS TO COMPLY WITH OUR OBLIGATIONS IN THE CONVENTION, I WISH TO CONVEY THAT, ON THE ISSUE OF INDUSTRY DECLARATIONS, THIS REPRESENTATION HAS OFFICIALLY REQUESTED ASSISTANCE FROM SOME COUNTRIES. THIS ASSISTANCE IS PRIMARILY AIMED AT IDENTIFYING CHEMICAL INDUSTRY PLAYERS IN THE PHILIPPINES WITH THE HOPE THAT THEY CAN BE BETTER INFORMED OF THEIR OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE CONVENTION.  
ON THIS MATTER, I WISH TO THANK CANADA, THE U.S. AND JAPAN FOR GIVING US THEIR INITIAL FEEDBACK ON OUR REQUEST FOR ASSISTANCE. WE CONTINUE TO AWAIT THE FEEDBACK OF THE OTHER COUNTRIES.  
MR. CHAIRMAN,  
AS MY COUNTRY REMAINS COMMITTED TO FULFILL ITS OBLIGATIONS UNDER THE CONVENTION, PLEASE ALSO BE ASSURED THAT WE LIKEWISE REMAIN COMMITTED TO ENSURING A MEANINGFUL COMMEMORATION OF THE 10TH ANNIVERSARY IN 2007 OF THE CONVENTION AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OPCW AND SUCCESSFUL 2ND REVIEW CONFERENCE IN 2008. 
WE HOPE THAT THE ABOVE EVENTS WILL PROVIDE ALL OF US THE OPPORTUNITY TO INCREASE THE VISIBILITY OF, AND TO STIMULATE RENEWED PUBLIC INTEREST ON, THE ORGANIZATION AND THE CONVENTION. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
THERE ARE MANY IMPORTANT ISSUES TO BE DISCUSSED IN THIS SESSION. I DO NOT WISH TO TAKE MORE OF YOUR TIME BUT I DO WISH TO REITERATE TO YOU MY DELEGATION’S FULLEST SUPPORT AND COOPERATION. 
THANK YOU. 
Eleventh Session of the Conference of States Parties to the 
Chemical Weapons Convention 

Statement in the General Debate 
By 
H. E. Mr. Sibte Yahya Naqvi 

Ambassador and Permanent Representative of Pakistan to the  
OPCW 

The Hague, 06 December 2006 
(Please check against delivery) 
Mr. Chairman, 
It is a great pleasure for me to extend to you, an experienced and able diplomat with a distinguished record of contribution to the work of the OPCW, my warm felicitations on your election as Chairman of the 11th Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention.  In your endeavours for the success of this Conference, please be assured of the full support and cooperation of the Pakistan delegation. 
To your predecessor Ambassador José Antonio Arróspide of Peru, we owe much gratitude for the exemplary manner in which he guided the deliberations of the last Conference. On many difficult issues, his wisdom and sagacity led to outcomes that were beneficial to all concerned.  As he leaves The Hague to take up his new responsibilities, we wish him good health and every success. 
My delegation associates itself fully with the statement delivered by the distinguished Ambassador of Cuba on behalf of the Non-Aligned delegations and China. 
Mr. Chairman, 
We approach the 10th anniversary of the Convention’s entry into force with a sense of satisfaction and hope engendered by OPCW’s record of accomplishments. The Organisation is a unique institution based on the only legal instrument that comprehensively bans an entire class of weapons of mass destruction under conditions of strict multilateral verification.  This is in contrast with regimes governing other weapons of mass destruction. 
While the Convention itself represents a unique accomplishment in historical terms, the 10 years of its operation has further enhanced its value.  Here, I would like to acknowledge the invaluable services of Director General Rogelio Pfirter whose effective stewardship of the Technical Secretariat has earned our respect and admiration.  In his important statement before the Conference he has ably highlighted both the achievements of the OPCW and the challenges it faces.  
The foremost issue confronting this Conference is the issue of compliance with the provisions of the Convention relating to elimination of chemical weapons. 
During the negotiations for the Chemical Weapons Convention enough care had been exercised to set a reasonable period for the destruction of chemical arsenals. The stockpiles of the two major possessors were the point of reference.  The constraints and compulsions were duly taken into account in setting the various phases of destruction.  Timely alignment of national priorities and effort should have enabled fulfilment of these obligations.  The stockpiles of other significant possessors should also have been eliminated within this time period.   
1 

This session of the Conference is required to take decisions that will impinge on the viability of the Convention and the sanctity of its provisions.  We appreciate the fact that destruction activity in one possessor state is gaining momentum and there has been a sincere effort to explain its compulsions by another. This should enable the Conference to take a fair and objective view. 
 However, conditions under which extension decisions are adopted must be spelt out unambiguously.  More rigorous evaluation criteria must be put in place so that the situation can be closely monitored between now and the final destruction deadlines. Clear explanations of how the possessors intend to resolve matters should be integral to these decisions. 
The Technical Secretariat’s competence and objectivity must continue to be relied upon as an assurance that the obligations and commitments are being fulfilled. We do not favour measures that could provide a false sense of progress. However, our position on the proposal for State Party visits to evaluate destruction activity remains flexible provided this is not considered as a precedent to establish measures that do not find reflection in the Convention. 
We emphasise the need for closer look at all such decisions and hope that the Conference will duly inject substantive assurances of compliance with the Convention’s obligations by all possessor states. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The attention of the Conference has been drawn to the question of substantially increasing the number of annual inspections of OCPF plant sites, which will be effected through the Programme and Budget for the year 2007.  
Pakistan considers the transparency and confidence building measures of the Convention integral to its credibility.  It is in this spirit that we have accepted inspections of 1/3rd of our facilities that fall under the provisions of the Convention. We will continue to fulfil our obligations in good faith and in a spirit of strengthening the Convention. 
We, however, share the view that the basis of OCPF inspections should be made equitable.  Also discussions about the spread of inspections should take place independently of the financial negotiations so that prior understandings can become the basis of approving budgetary proposals. Increasing the number of inspections while proposals to redress the problems in the existing selection method remain still unresolved could lead to further distortions.  There is also the need to uphold the principle that facilities of most concern to the object and purpose of the Convention must retain the priority attention for verification measures.  We are prepared to work constructively to find a reasonable solution to the matter.  
2 

Mr. Chairman, 
We support the recommendation made by the Executive Council in the context of the continuation of the Action Plan on Implementation of Article VII obligations. Pakistan will continue to support legitimate proposals that seek to enhance the implementation of the Convention around the world in a cooperative framework. 
 On 3rd November, a seminar was held in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs in Islamabad, for the chemical industry in Pakistan.  Experts from the Technical Secretariat made presentations designed to enable the industry a better understanding of the Convention and of its responsibilities.  Due to the quality of the presentations and the keen interest shown by participants, the event was successful and satisfying for both sides. 
A day earlier, the Foreign Service Academy in Islamabad held a daylong module on the Chemical Weapons Convention which is part of the curriculum at the Academy.  In addition to trainee diplomats from Pakistan, young diplomats from 24 countries benefited from lectures delivered by the Secretariat’s team.  The obligations of Article VII were suitably highlighted to the participants. 
We thank the Director General for supporting the programme and hope that it can become an annual event.
 Another important Action Plan concerns the Universality of the Convention. We can take satisfaction from the fact that the Chemical Weapons Convention has in a relatively short period of time attracted the adherence of nearly all the States in the world.  It is our hope that the remaining few States will also join us soon. In this regard our appreciation goes to the Technical Secretariat and the Facilitator, Mr. Said Moussi from Algeria for their efforts towards attaining the goal of Universality of the Convention. 
We would especially like to invite those that have reservations rooted in political considerations to consider the Convention on its own merits and the security advantages that the acceptance of the Convention would bring to their neighbourhood. At the same time, it is important to address the underlying causes impeding progress on universality and to consider positive incentives for States that are not Parties. 
We would in particular emphasize the importance of the full implementation of Article XI of the Convention to promote beneficial exchanges and enhanced international cooperation in the field of peaceful chemical activities.  We do indeed look forward to constructive deliberations on this matter which can lead to an action plan for the implementation of this important article. Similarly, in the context of Article X on Assistance and Protection we welcome the work that has been done and the substantive contribution that the OPCW is poised to make in this area.  We, however, feel that the opportunities for participation in significant events such as major field exercises should be more widely available to all States Parties.  
3 

Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation fully endorses the recommendation of the Executive Council concerning the continuation of work related to the establishment of an OPCW Office in Africa.  Our support for the African group stems from the convincing rationale behind their proposal and we hope that the on-going deliberations will conclude on a successful note.  
A worthy son of Africa Mr. John Makhubalo will soon be leaving the Organization.  I would like to place on record our deep appreciation for the excellent contribution that he has made as Head of the International Cooperation and Assistance Division in promoting the interests of all States Parties and especially the developing countries. We look forward to welcoming his successor Ambassador Mrs. Kalimi Mugambi Mworia of Kenya and wish her every success. 
A senior member of the Secretariat who has joined us since the last CSP is Deputy Director General Ambassador John Freeman. I have no doubt that his rich diplomatic and managerial experience will strengthen the Secretariat in its mission. 
Mr. Chairman, 
In conclusion, I would like to reaffirm the importance Pakistan attaches to the Chemical Weapons Convention and the work of the OPCW in ridding our planet of the scourge of chemical weapons.  The decisions we take in this Conference will have a significant impact on the future of this body. We have in the past dealt with many challenges through goodwill and a spirit of consensus. My delegation will continue to work in a constructive and forward looking spirit to promote such consensus at this Conference. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
4 

SOUTH AFRICAN EMBASSY 
40 Wassenaarseweg, 2596 CJ The Hague 
FAX NUMBER: 070-3460669 TELEPHONENUMBER: 070-3924501 WEBSITE ADDRESS: www.southafrica.nl 
ZUID-AFRIKAANSE AMBASSADE 
Wassenaarseweg 40, 2596 CJ Den Haag 
FAXNUMMER: 070-3467336 TELEFOONNUMMER: 070-7507625 E-MAIL ADRES: multilateral@zuidafrika.nl 
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR HLENGIWE B MKHIZE  
SOUTH AFRICAN AMBASSADOR TO THE NETHERLANDS   
TO THE 
GENERAL DEBATE OF THE 11TH SESSION OF THE 
CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES TO THE 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

5 DECEMBER 2006 

Check against delivery 
Mr. Chairperson, 
The South African delegation would like to congratulate you on your election as Chairperson of the 11th session of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. I would like to assure you of our full cooperation and support for your efforts to guide this session’s work to a successful conclusion.  
My delegation would also like to acknowledge and thank the outgoing chairperson, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide of Peru, for his leadership and the outstanding manner in which he guided the work of the 10th session of the Conference of States Parties. 
My delegation would like to express its appreciation to the Director-General for his statement, which provides a clear and comprehensive overview of the status of the Convention and the Organisation.  
Allow me also to thank the Technical Secretariat for its hard work in organising this session of the Conference of States Parties as well as the support provided to Member States in the run-up to this session. 
Check against delivery 
Mr. Chairperson, 
The South African delegation associates itself with the statement delivered on behalf of the Non-aligned Movement by the representative of Cuba as well as that delivered by the representative of Sudan in his capacity as coordinator of the African Group.  
The 11th session of the Conference has a number of important decisions to consider. One decision in particular demands our close scrutiny and careful consideration. As all Member States are aware, we have before us the extension requests submitted by the major possessor States in terms of the final destruction deadline for all their chemical weapons.  These requests speak to the heart of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
Should the Conference decide to grant these extensions, the next six years, up to 2012, will become a defining period in the history of the Chemical Weapons Convention, as well as the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. 
Check against delivery 
Of particular significance during this extension period will be the manner in which the major possessor States fulfill their obligations, as it will have a direct impact on the continued functioning and success of the Convention and the Organisation beyond 2012.   
No other process, institution or mechanism in the field of disarmament and non-proliferation has come close to realising, in a similar manner, the destruction and prohibition of an entire category of weapons. For this to happen, however, all destruction activities should be completed within the deadlines determined by the Convention. This will not only place the Convention and OPCW’s continuing successful operations beyond question, but will also ensure all Member States’ continued commitment to the non­proliferation ideals of the Convention. 
As mentioned during the 47th Session of the Executive Council, South Africa does not stand unsympathetic towards the realities and difficulties faced by the major possessor States in fully meeting their destruction obligations.  My delegation further indicated during that 
Check against delivery 
session that it would be in a position to give favourable consideration to the requests submitted by the major possessors for the extension of the 100% destruction deadline to 29 April 2012.   
It would, however, be imperative in this regard that the major possessor States fully commit to preserving the integrity of the Chemical Weapons Convention by adhering to the 2012 deadline. The incentive provided by the final destruction deadline is a powerful tool to keep possessor States focused on their destruction efforts. Losing or diminishing this incentive would be a grave blow to the Convention and the OPCW.  
Mr. Chairperson, 
The South African delegation looks forward to the successful conclusion and adoption of the programme budget for 2007.  We would like to commend the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat for the vigor with which they are pursuing responsible budgetary processes in the organisation. The negative growth budget 
Check against delivery 
presented to States Parties, representing an almost 1,7% reduction in the over-all budget, is commendable. 
My delegation, however, believes continuous zero-nominal growth and especially negative growth budgets, is not in the best interest of the Organisation. This is particularly in view of the fact that the OPCW still has much to do in terms of pending destruction activities as well as providing assistance to States Parties.  Where savings are realised through responsible budgeting processes, it would be more prudent to allow States Parties the opportunity to identify, with the assistance of the Technical Secretariat, programmes and activities that could be strengthened by utilizing these savings. 
Mr. Chairperson, 
An issue that is of particular concern to the South African Delegation is the establishment of an OPCW Office in Africa. We would like to extend our appreciation to Mr. Andres Rugeles of Colombia, for his efforts to advance this matter. We would encourage him to continue to work closely with the African Group, as well as, other interested 
Check against delivery 
States Parties in order to ensure that this Office is established as soon as possible.  
It is particularly important for the future Office to have a close working relationship with the African Union, including AU structures such as the Peace and Security Council and the AU Commission.  This would provide the office with the legitimacy it requires as well as a sense familiarity and buy-in that is necessary for successful cooperation and assistance. 
It is important that this Office not be established just for the sake of it, but to truly assist African States in implementing the provisions of the Convention.  
Mr. Chairperson, 
My delegation would like to reiterate the importance it attaches to the principle of equitable geographical representation in terms of the recruitment of personnel for the Technical Secretariat as well as 
Check against delivery 
ensuring a favourable gender balance, especially by appointing more women to senior positions. 
We appeal to the Director-General to pay specific attention to the appointment of African nationals in the Technical Secretariat in a balanced and representative manner. A significant number of States Parties is from the African Region and we would urge the Director-General to take special measures to ensure that this reality is reflected in the composition of the Technical Secretariat, not only in numbers but also in terms of seniority.   
Mr. Chairperson, 
The South African delegation looks forward to the tenth anniversary in 2007, of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention as well as participating in the preparations and activities planned by the Technical Secretariat. We would appeal to the Director-General to use this opportunity to reach out to States Parties, particularly from developing regions, not only through commemorative activities but also through increased cooperation and assistance programmes. The 
Check against delivery 
full implementation of the Convention will be much sooner realised through cooperation, assistance and tangible benefits to Member States, than coercion and sanctions.   
Finally Mr. Chairperson, 
My delegation acknowledges the activities that have commenced, under the leadership of Ambassador Lyn Parker of the United Kingdom, in preparation for the second review conference scheduled for 2008. The South African delegation looks forward to participating actively and constructively in this process during the coming year. 
Mr. Chairperson, 
The South African delegation looks forward to the successful consideration and conclusion of the programme of work of this 11th session under your able leadership.  
Thank you 
STATEMENT  
by H.E. Mr. Oleksandr Kupchyshyn 
 Ambassador, Permanent Representative  of Ukraine 
to the OPCW, Representative of Ukraine 
to the Eleventh Session of the Conference of States Parties to the Convention 
on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
The Hague, 
6 December 2006 

Mr. Chairman, 
.r. Director-General, 
Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
First of all I would like to join previous speakers in extending our warmest congratulations to you, Ambassador Alfonso Dastis of Spain, upon your assumption of the Chairmanship of the Conference. We believe, Mr. Chairman, that your skilful leadership and previous experience as a Chairman of the Executive Council, will allow you to steer successfully the work of the Eleventh Session of the Conference. In performing your important duties you may completely rely on full support and co-operation of the delegation of Ukraine. 
I would also like to thank the outgoing Chairman of the Conference, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide Del Busto of Peru for his role and contribution to the success of the previous Tenth Session of the Conference. It is also a great pleasure for us to extend our greetings of welcome to the OPCW Director-General Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter and express gratitude to him and the Technical Secretariat staff for their tireless efforts in ensuring strict implementation of the Convention, in promoting its universality and in rising awareness about its leading role in global multilateral disarmament efforts. 
On behalf of my Government I would like to assure you, that Ukraine  is ready to provide full support to the work of the OPCW Policy-Making Organs and Technical Secretariat, proceeding from its faithful and strict compliance with the CWC provisions. 
The delegation of Ukraine associates itself with the Statement by H.E.Markus Lyra, Under-Secretary of State, Finland, on behalf of the European Union. 
          Mr. Chairman, 
Universality of the CWC is an important prerequisite to increase its viability and ensure irreversibility of chemical disarmament in global dimension. Ukraine highly appreciates the efforts undertaken in the framework of the Action Plan for universality, which was adopted in 2003 and calls for universal adherence to the Convention by 2007 – the tenth year since its entry into force. Decision of the 
2 

Tenth session of the Conference has set up the target – to achieve at least 180 member states by the end of year 2006. Since the last session of the Conference, 6 new State Parties have joined the Convention and this target has been successfully achieved and exceeded. It gives me a special pleasure to welcome on this occasion Djibouti, Haiti, Liberia, Comoros, Central African Republic and Montenegro in their new capacity as States Parties to the CWC. Regrettably 14 countries still remain outside of the Convention. Some of them are situated in such volatile regions as Middle East and North-East Asia and their non-adherence to the CWC is an additional factor exacerbating security environment in these regions.  
In this context Ukraine commends the results achieved during the regional workshop for States not Party in the Mediterranean Basin and the Middle East, which was held in Rome, Italy, in October 2006 and hope that regional workshop for States non Party in Africa to be held in Algiers, Algeria, will be successful as well. 
Nevertheless all State Parties to the CWC should realise that future work towards universality will require multiplication of our common efforts and next year in fact should bear fruits on this way.  We therefore deem it necessary to appeal to the members of the Non-Aligned Movement, Organisation of American States, African Union, League of Arab Countries and ASEAN to put the issue of the CWC non-adherence on the top of their respective annual agendas with a view to promote among their member-countries, which for the time being remain outside the Convention, awareness about the advantages to join this unique multilateral instrument banning chemical weapons and, hopefully, convince them to join the OPCW’s community of nations sooner rather then later.  
Mr. Chairman, 
Development of chemical industry and science, wide scale manufacturing of chemicals and their growing accessibility combined  with the attractiveness of toxic chemicals for criminal individuals and terrorist groups require high level of preparedness within the societies to prevent their illegitimate use. Therefore not only the CWC universality is a critical point, but strict national implementation is equally important in the international endeavours for a safer world. Implementation of basic obligations pursuant to Article VII of the CWC requires concerted efforts of police, security service, customs, boarder control, as well as of industrial, scientific and trade communities. From this perspective we attach importance to the establishment by the State Parties of their respective National Authorities and adoption of national implementation legislation. During last years we are witnessing continuous progress in this direction and highly appreciate the assistance provided by donor-countries to the countries, which have deficient recourses and lack of expertise in technical, legal or law enforcement spheres. All these efforts strengthen the confidence and trust, which lay foundation for mutual cooperation within the CWC framework. Ukraine, therefore, stands ready to endorse the recommendation to the Conference .oncerning the “Sustaining follow up to the Plan of Action regarding the implementation of Article VII obligations” 
3 

and acknowledges the efforts of Dutch  delegation as a facilitator of the work in this direction.   
Ukraine has always displayed utmost responsibility in implementation of its obligations under the international treaties. The unconditional compliance with the CWC is one of top foreign policy priority in the field of arms control and non­proliferation for Ukraine.  
The proper compliance with obligations under the Convention is ensured by the National Program on CWC implementation for the ten-year period till 2008. The Program co-ordinates concerted actions of number of ministries and agencies involved in the process of CWC implementation. Ukraine has adopted appropriate legislation, which provides legal framework for a binding CWC implementation, including respective provisions in the country’s new Criminal Code. Ukraine strictly controls at the governmental level all export-import operations and transfers of scheduled chemicals. The regulations are subject to change and take into account the decisions adopted by the Policy-making organs of the OPCW, as exemplified by Decree of the Government of Ukraine # 809, dated 7 June 2006 “On changes to the State control on international transfers of dual-use goods”. Amendments to the previous regulation proceeded from two basic requirements: diversification of conditions for the transfers of chemicals, belonging to different Schedules of the CWC, more appropriate language for the requirements to the transfers of chemicals to State Parties and State not Parties to the Convention. In light of the EC Recommendation to this Session on “Measures regarding the transfer of Schedule 3 chemicals to State not Party to the Convention“, which we fully endorse, the National Authority of Ukraine will continue to attach importance to this issue. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Next years are expected to be crucial for global efforts in the chemical disarmament, as an increasing number of destruction facilities will start operating. Like many other delegations we attach particular importance to the timely destruction of chemical weapons’ stockpiles, accumulated by the possessor states, especially by two major possessors, namely Russian Federation and the USA. We are aware that from technological, environmental and financial perspectives this process is highly complicated, very expensive and time-consuming. Nevertheless Convention has established specific deadlines for the destruction of chemical weapons, which should have been met. Since the last session of the Conference, requests for the establishment of a revised dates for the phase 4 deadline for the destruction of Category 1 chemical weapons were put forward by almost all possessor-states. Adoption of these revised dates will legitimize new political reality, namely the fact that international community should reconcile itself for another five years with the enduring risks associated with chemical weapons stockpiles. At the same time Ukraine fully respects  legitimate right of this States to use relevant provisions of the Convention and encourages State Parties concerned to ensure their compliance with revised deadlines requested by them. 
4 

We hope that possessor states will inform regularly and transparently about progress and difficulties they are facing in implementing their chemical weapons’ elimination programs, particularly using the mechanism of visits, which was under discussion during the last time. At the same time, every effort should be made to respect final possible extended deadline for the destruction of all chemical weapons by all possessor states. 
Verification regime of the OPCW is the tool not only for the multilateral control over destruction of chemical weapons, but it is a crucial element for chemical non-proliferation. Ukraine, which has received in 2006 two inspections of its chemical industry facilities, supports current OPCW’s activities, aimed at maintenance of strict chemical non-proliferation regime. Nevertheless we support current efforts to develop new methodology in selection of the inspections, which will enable to focus on the inspection of the facilities posing greater risks.  
A comprehensive and timely national implementation of the Convention is the only way to achieving successfully the CWC goals. One of the problems in the implementation of the Convention is a timely submission of annual declarations on past activities. Ukraine spares no effort to submit the declarations in time frames stipulated by the Convention. In this context we support the exploratory work of the Technical Secretariat to spread the practice of presenting  declarations in electronic form. This will allow us to improve  the effectiveness of the verification regime and redress the misbalance in the implementation of the Convention by the States Parties. 
Mr. Chairman, 
         Ensuring the implementation of Article X of the CWC remains one of the most important tasks for the OPCW and its Members. The year since the conduct of the major OPCW-EADRCC (Euro - Atlantic Disaster Relief Coordination Center) event “Joint Assistance 2005” exercise, which was conducted at the Yavoriv Training Area near L’viv in Ukraine from 9 to 13 October 2005, much has been done to draw lessons and conclusions relevant both to the Technical Secretariat and State parties. From this perspective it should be emphasized that Ninth Annual Assistance workshop which was held in Kyiv, Ukraine, 18-20 October 2006 was a subsequent step forward in the understanding of current trends and challenges in further implementation of the Article X of the Convention. It is a bit regrettable that such important and successful event was not mentioned in yesterday brilliant statement of the Director-General. 
In this context I am pleased to inform that Ukrainian side plans to host OPCW’s workshop on issues of cooperation between local emergency management authorities and international organisations in March 2007. 
Mr.Chairman 
5 

The activities of the OPCW are based on efficient budgetary system and we appreciate efforts of the Technical Secretariat aimed to improve the effectiveness of cost management and measures to reduce some spending. Planned “zero” budget increase which is not expected to hamper effective functioning of the OPCW is very important achievement of the Director-General and his well­experienced team. We hope that the Conference will adopt the OPCW Program and the Budget for 2007 with due consideration of the needs and interests of both the OPCW as a whole and individual States Parties. 
Mr. Chairman, 
At this Session of the Conference we are addressing difficult issues that demand our close attention. The delegation of Ukraine is ready to co-operate fully with the delegations of other States Parties and the OPCW Secretariat to do its utmost to work for the implementation of the important task of the Organisation aimed at complete elimination of chemical weapons.  
Thank you for attention. 
THE REPUPLIC OF UGANDA 
STATEMENT OF THE REPUPLIC OF UGANDA 
AT 
THE ELEVENTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

DELIVERED BY 
AMB. MIRJAM BLAAK 
HEAD OF DELEGATION OF 

THE REPUBLIC OF UGANDA 

5-8 December  2006 
The Hague, the Netherlands 

(Please check against delivery) 
Mr. Chairman, 
1.
 I wish to join all previous speakers in congratulating you on your election as the Chairperson of the 11th Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).  I would also like to use this opportunity to thank the outgoing Chairperson of the 10th Conference, for the good work done. It is also my great pleasure to congratulate all new members upon their election to the 11th Session. 

2.
 I do extend my Government’s appreciation to the Director-General of the OPCW, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter, and the Staff of OPCW for the support they have extended to Uganda which enabled us to comply with relevant provisions of this Convention more specifically with Article VII. This has been achieved through a number of training courses for our officers at different levels thus contributing to capacity building which is an essential part of our development in Africa. 

3.
 Uganda wishes to align itself with the statements delivered on behalf of the African group and the non-aligned movement (NAM) and China. The Chemical Weapons Convention, a key cornerstone of the international community’s collective action, ensures that weapons of mass destruction are and will not be used against nations and peoples of the world nor threaten them with their use. It is against this background that all of us gathered here should adopt determined and consistent policies in order to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction. However, this does not mean that we should not make use of materials or technological advancements for useful purposes, which are not prohibited by the Convention. 

The principal of universality is one of the key objectives at present. The accession of six new members is a very positive development in this regard. 

4.
 Regarding implementation of Article VII I would like to emphasise that Uganda already established a National Authority in February 2002 which is fully functioning.  

Uganda’s Plan of Action on national implementation measures, much as it is a non-possessor State, will utilise all the available resources in order to meet the provisions of Article VII of the Convention. Allow me to inform the Conference that at national level, we are moving forward to fulfil our obligations. Our national legislation bill, called “The Chemical Weapons Prohibition Bill” has been finalised. Presently Cabinet is considering this Bill after it will be presented to Parliament for enactment. The Bill once enacted will give this Convention the full force and effect it deserves. We are confident that our efforts will bear results soon.   

5.
 We do welcome the OPCW Programme and Budget for 2007 and do wish to encourage the Technical Secretariat to continue with the implementation of its priority programmes.    

6.
 I would like to express our appreciation for the continued support we have received from the European Union (EU) and the OPCW to our National Authority in areas of capacity building, technical and awareness of the CWC. I wish to thank in particular the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland, France and German for the financial assistance and capacity building through the provision of office and laboratory equipment.  


I wish to thank the Technical Secretariat for facilitating a National Authority Training Course on the Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention for the National Authority members and other Stakeholders on 6-7 September 2004 in Kampala, Uganda.  
It is worth mentioning that the drafting of the national legislation would not have proceeded as quickly without the assistance of the Technical Secretariat. The awareness workshop enhanced our legislative development process to the level we have reached at present. Other States Parties which are facing similar difficulties in developing national legislation should learn from Uganda’s positive experience and make use of the facilities offered by the Technical Secretariat.  
7.
 In view of the promotion of universality, it is important that an office is established in Africa to serve as an outreach office. The likely success of such office will definitely outweigh its cost. Creating awareness on the African continent and allowing African leaders to make the necessary input towards international peace and security will be of prime importance. 

8.
 Uganda is pleased to announce that it is willing to host the Fifth African Regional Meeting of National Authorities in Kampala in October 2007 and welcomes all participants to “the Pearl of Africa”, as Uganda had been referred to by the late Sir Winston Churchill.  

9.
 I would like to take this opportunity to pay tribute to the Director of International Cooperation and Assistance Division, Mr. John Makhubalo who will be leaving the Secretariat in due course.  


During his tenure Mr. Makhubalo has succeeded in achieving the goals and objectives of the OPCW by building a strong and effective Division under his capable leadership.  
Uganda welcomes his successor, H.E. Ambassador Kalimi Mworia, and wishes her every success in her endeavours. We are very confident that she will execute this challenging task in a very dedicated and enthusiastic manner for which she has earned respect in her present assignment.    
Mr. Chairman, 
10. Allow me to conclude my short remarks by reiterating our commitment to the objects and purpose of the CWC as a key element in ensuring that our future generations are not faced with obliteration and destruction by weapons of mass destruction. We can only provide a guarantee when all such weapons of mass destruction are eliminated and all of us join in preventing the production of such weapons so that they can not be used again for purposes against humanity. 
Lastly, Mr.Chairman, I would like to wish you and all distinguished delegates success in your deliberations. 
Thank you 
STATEMENT BY 
AMBASSADOR ERIC M. JAVITS 
UNITED STATES DELEGATION 
TO THE 
ELEVENTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
OF THE 
ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 
DECEMBER 5, 2006 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Distinguished Delegates, 
Let me begin by taking this opportunity, Mr. Chairman to express my pleasure that you are serving us once again in a leadership role. I pledge the support of the U.S. delegation to ensuring the success of this Conference of the States Parties and to demonstrating once again that the OPCW is a model for multilateral cooperation. I also wish to say a few words to your predecessor, and express my profound regret that this will be for the last time in this setting, before he soon leaves The Hague. Ambassador Arrospide, your service has reflected honor and credit on Peru and yourself and has enriched this Organization. 
I would also like to extend a welcome to those States Parties attending their first Conference. We now have 181 member states, and, with only 14 States not Party remaining, we are closer than ever to our objective of universal adherence to the Convention. As these numbers indicate, there is no place in the modern world for chemical weapons. We, the States Parties, working closely with the Director General and the Technical Secretariat, need to redouble our efforts and reach out directly through bilateral and regional contacts to those states that have unfortunately chosen to remain outside the treaty. We, the 
2 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

States Parties, should offer any necessary assistance to facilitate their accession to the Convention, and also send the clear message that joining this treaty is part of being a full member in the community of nations. 
More than at any other time since entry into force of the Convention, 2006 has seen States Parties focus on the issue of chemical weapons destruction. Experience has shown that the task of eliminating the legacy of chemical weapons stocks has proven more difficult than any of us imagined. All but one of the declared possessor States have had to request extensions to the 100% percent destruction deadline. While there are great challenges, the commitment to complete destruction of all CW stocks is very clear. Collectively, there are more destruction facilities operating than ever before, and more chemical weapons stocks will be destroyed in 2006 than in any previous year. With these challenges and achievements in mind, the Conference will consider this week the consensus recommendations of the Executive Council on several extension requests. We trust the Conference this week will approach those recommended for approval with its customary judicious and careful consideration. 
With respect to the extension requests on which the Executive Council has yet to make consensus recommendations, we believe 
3 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

that it will do so very soon and that the Conference will also approve them by consensus. But, in any case, the US remains absolutely and irreversibly committed to destroying 100% of its stockpile, and will make every effort to do so safely and as soon as possible under its federal state and local laws, and under the watchful and continuing scrutiny of the OPCW’s inspection regime. 
In 2006, there has also been gratifying progress towards full national implementation of Article VII obligations. I want to express our appreciation for the tireless efforts of Ambassador Santiago Oñate, who has spearheaded the work of the Technical Secretariat in this area. We strongly support the consensus agreement reached by the Executive Council for continued work in 2007 on Article VII, and thank the able facilitator, Ambassador Maarten Lak, for his unflagging efforts in this regard. 
Much work remains, however, to achieve full implementation of Article VII obligations. With nearly all States Parties having established National Authorities, we must focus our efforts now on enactment of necessary legislation and administrative measures. This means continuing technical support for preparing draft legislation, and, once drafted, offering encouragement, where and as appropriate, to turn it into law. It is 
4 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

particularly important that States Parties playing prominent roles in the manufacturing, processing and trade of chemicals fully meet their obligations for national implementation. The United States will continue its efforts to provide assistance in this area, working in complete cooperation with the Technical Secretariat. I am pleased to inform you that U.S. Assistant Secretary of Commerce Christopher Padilla will be addressing this issue in detail when we reach that agenda item. He will offer some creative proposals on how States Parties can move ahead to strengthen our combined efforts in 2007. 
This week we will also consider approving an OPCW budget for 2007. We commend the Director-General for submitting a second consecutive zero nominal growth budget. We believe this budget proposal addresses all the desired program requirements in a manner that is both financially prudent and operationally effective. We have widely agreed that next year we will hold in­depth discussions about Article VI industry inspections. That will satisfy the desire expressed by many to fully explore and understand this area and help us in future years to find common resolve so that budget questions on Art. VI can be addressed with shared purpose and broader understanding. For that reason, we should find the flexibility to allow consensus to be reached for adoption of the 2007 budget, knowing our actions must not 
5 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

impugn the technical assessment of risk by the Technical Secretariat on the number and type of inspections. The issue of ensuring an adequate level of inspections at Article VI facilities, particularly OCPFs, will continue to be a shared concern we must address patiently, collegially, and constructively with important input and assistance from the Technical Secretariat. 
We also have before us a number of key recommendations from the Executive Council, each addressing longstanding issues of importance to the continued effectiveness of the OPCW. These include the establishment of a Host Country Committee, a proposal from the Director-General regarding implementation of the tenure policy, and an arrangement to regularize payments of arrears that could facilitate greater participation in the Organization. 
There are a number of challenging issues that we will need to tackle in 2007. One that is of particular significance is determining a fair and equitable site selection procedure for inspection of other chemical production facilities, or “OCPFs,” that appropriately reflects the letter and the spirit of the Convention. Agreement on such a procedure is long overdue and the United States hopes that an agreed approach to this complex 
6 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

and critical issue can be reached in 2007. I also hope that there will be an opportunity to discuss questions that have been raised about the process for declaring OCPFs, given the significant resources that will be needed in this area.   
Also during 2007, critical preparations will take place for a successful Second Review Conference in the first half of 2008. I want to express our appreciation to Ambassador Lyn Parker who has very capably helped launch our efforts in this regard. The First Review Conference in 2003 set a high bar in terms of reviewing the CWC’s achievements and charting a path for the future. I am confident that under Ambassador’s Parker’s leadership, and with the positive involvement of all delegations, we will be able to match and even exceed that standard. 
In 2007, we will also mark the tenth anniversary of entry into force of the Convention. Speaking frankly, I do not believe that this Convention, or this Organization, receives the attention it deserves. Perhaps that is a testament to what together we have been able to achieve here, as all too often the world only pays attention when things go wrong.  That said, the events that have been planned to mark this historic milestone are our opportunity to highlight the accomplishments of the 
7 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

Convention and the Organization. The United States will support these efforts and encourages others to do so, as well. 
The United States strongly believes that the best way for the OPCW to receive the attention it deserves is to build on its consensus and cooperation ethos to preserve, and hopefully enhance, the relevance of the Convention in addressing today’s security threats involving the potential hostile use of toxic chemicals. The United States seeks not just a Convention with universal membership, but also a Convention that addresses real security issues, and whose members universally implement their commitments. We all are committed to ensuring the security of our citizens, and we therefore must continue to work to strengthen our collective security net. 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Distinguished Representatives, it has been an honor to address you today. As we prepare for the tenth anniversary of the Convention, we can cite a record of solid accomplishments, particularly in 2006. The United States delegation and I personally, pledge to work with all of you during the course of this Conference, and over the next year, as we address the important issues on our agenda and continue our work in pursuit of a world where the 
8 

INTERPRETER’S ONLY 

possibility of the use of chemical weapons is excluded completely. 
Thank you. 
9 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

Speech to the Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties 
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
The Hague, the Netherlands 
December 6, 2006 

Christopher Padilla 
Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Export Administration 
U.S. Department of Commerce 

1 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Distinguished Delegates, 
The British playwright Oscar Wilde once commented acidly that modern calendars mar the simplicity of our lives by reminding us that each and every day is the anniversary of some perfectly uninteresting event.  With due respect to Mr. Wilde, next April 29th is marked on my calendar, and I do not think those assembled at this Conference would find the anniversary at all uninteresting.  In fact, anniversaries are excellent opportunities to reflect, to assess, and to resolve to achieve new goals. 
As we approach the 10th Anniversary of the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention, we will find much to celebrate.  We will also find much work remaining to be done. One important area where work continues is national implementation of our basic Convention requirements, and it is this issue that I would like to address today. 
Last year, the Conference adopted a decision on Article VII that established reporting obligations for States Parties, set benchmark dates for completing tasks, and called upon the Executive Council, the Technical Secretariat and States Parties to work together in the implementation effort.  The United States is pleased to note that there has been measurable progress over the past year, due in part to the continued emphasis placed on this issue by the previous Conference.   
Specifically, the Technical Secretariat reports that since the Conference last convened: 
• 
Twenty-five States Parties have established a National Authority; 

• 
Thirteen States Parties have enacted legislation covering all key areas;  

• 
Ten States Parties have adopted all measures to control transfers of 
Scheduled chemicals, and nine have submitted complete initial 
declarations; and 


• 
Twelve States Parties have established penalties for failure to provide data on Article VI declarations. 


Clearly, our collective effort to adopt a meaningful decision has yielded real results. We can take pride in the progress achieved to date, such as the establishment of a National Authority by 95% of States Parties.  But rather than rest on those laurels, we should now turn our focus to full legislative and administrative implementation of the CWC’s requirements, as my colleague Ambassador Eric Javits suggested yesterday. 
Significant work still remains.  While most States Parties have now either adopted or drafted legislation, several areas of national implementation merit 
2 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

sustained attention and scrutiny.  For example, fewer than half of States Parties have: 
• 	
adopted all necessary measures to control transfers of Scheduled 
chemicals; 


• 	
established penalties for failure to provide data on Article VI declarations; and 

• 	
adopted legislation covering all key areas. 


Having worked to pass bills in my own country, I recognize that enactment of comprehensive legislation is a difficult process.  Parliamentary procedures differ greatly. Yet as difficult as this process may be, it is the Conference’s responsibility to ensure that the national implementation effort does not slip or lose focus. Our long-term objective must continue to be universal and comprehensive compliance with the obligations of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
To ensure that this commitment is not an empty one, it is important to set realistic, achievable milestones on the road to universal implementation.  Moving forward from this Conference, therefore, the United States urges that we focus first on those chemical-related activities that are most relevant to the object and purpose of the Convention: the production and trade of organic chemicals.   
Therefore, our most immediate implementation priority should be to ensure that all States Parties that play prominent roles in the production and trade of organic chemicals have fully met their Article VII obligations.    
We are closer to this goal than we perhaps realize.  While the data are imprecise, the United States estimates that approximately 90% of the world’s current organic chemical production and trade is occurring in and among States Parties that have met their national implementation obligations. Most of the remaining world production and trade is taking place in about twenty States Parties.  Many of those twenty have requested technical assistance from the United States, the Technical Secretariat, and other States Parties.  We welcome these requests. 
To make next year’s celebration of the 10th Anniversary of the CWC even more meaningful, we should collectively focus in 2007 on encouraging full implementation by the approximately twenty States Parties that have organic chemical production facilities, but that have not yet fulfilled all of their Article VII obligations.  Importantly, we should pursue this goal through focused cooperation and assistance, not through punitive measures.  Indeed, the United States suggests this approach as a way to set priorities in our assistance efforts, not to target any States Parties for negative action. 
By focusing assistance efforts, we could bring virtually all existing world organic chemical production and trade under the umbrella of Article VII implementation 
3 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

during the 10th Anniversary Year of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  This milestone is well within our reach, and while achieving it would not be the end of our efforts on Article VII, it would be an important accomplishment on the road to universal implementation. 
There are three important steps in achieving this goal: 
First, the Conference should embrace the Article VII decision that is before us this week. The decision adopted by the 10th Conference included specific reporting, oversight, and assistance provisions that are sustained in the decision of this Conference. These provisions are crucial to ensuring that momentum on this issue is not lost. I applaud the efforts of the Technical Secretariat to provide timely and detailed reports to the Executive Council on the status of each State Party’s implementation efforts.  In the coming year, I encourage the Technical Secretariat to include in its reporting a measure of how close we are to achieving full implementation by all States Parties that have organic chemical production facilities. We also will urge the Technical Secretariat and Executive Council to focus with special urgency in 2007 on providing technical assistance to those States Parties that have such facilities, but have not yet fully implemented Article 
VII. 
Second, it is crucial for the Executive Council early next year to adopt a decision relating to submission of nil declarations.  Currently, States Parties are required to submit annual declarations on Article VI activity if it surpasses the declaration thresholds established in the Convention. The absence of any declaration leaves the Technical Secretariat in doubt whether there are activities that should be monitored and verified. Agreement early next year on a nil declaration and a requirement for provisional implementation would better enable the Technical Secretariat to determine how close we are to achieving the goal of ensuring that States Parties have fully complied with their national implementation obligations, including declaration of all relevant chemical activities. 
Third, it is important for governments to form partnerships to prepare for implementation.  One such partnership is technical assistance, and I am pleased to note that the United States has partnered with the Technical Secretariat to provide more than twenty-five technical assistance visits in the last two years.  The Implementation Assistance Programme (IAP), co-developed by the United States and Romania, has proven a useful tool for States Parties seeking to meet their implementation requirements.  To expand the reach of this tool, U.S. representatives will be distributing Spanish and French translations of the IAP at this Conference, and we will make the tool available on our website at www.cwc.gov. 
The IAP was designed to help governments.  But we know from our own experience how important it is for governments also to partner with industry to identify potentially declarable chemical producers and traders and to assist them 
4 

CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY 

in preparing for implementation.  To help, I am pleased to announce today that the United States has developed a Global Chemical Industry Compliance Program (GC-ICP) as a companion to the IAP. This simple, five-step program is designed to assist chemical industries in complying with the CWC and related national implementation obligations.  It includes sample company policy statements, personnel and training programs to comply with CWC obligations, and procedures to determine whether a chemical facility has declaration and record keeping requirements.  The document is being distributed at this Conference; I encourage States Parties to obtain copies and distribute it to industry within their territories.  It will also be available on our website at www.cwc.gov. 
Three years ago, the Review Conference brought attention to the issue of national implementation, spotlighting it as essential to the effective operation of the Convention. For its part, the United States is committed to help, not only through the implementation tools we have announced today, but also through ongoing technical assistance efforts. This week’s Article VII decision, which we wholeheartedly welcome, is the third Conference decision in this area in a little over three years. 
But we cannot treat Article VII compliance as just a recurring administrative matter. Rather, we should set achievable milestones so that our 10th Anniversary Year will not be just another one of Oscar Wilde’s uninteresting events.  Helping to bring about full implementation by “Twenty in Ten” would be an important milestone on the road to universal implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. It is a priority that is consistent with the basic object and purpose of this organization.  It is a goal to be achieved through cooperation and assistance, not through punitive measures. It is an objective that is in our security interests, and well within our grasp. With hard work, we have the chance to celebrate next year not just an anniversary, but an accomplishment.   
Thank you. 
5 

SPEECH BY H. E. DR. DO HUU HAO 
DEPUTY MINISTER FOR INDUSTRY 
OF THE SOCIALIST REPUBLIC OF VIET NAM 
At the Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties of the OPCW The 
Hague 5 - 8 December 2006 
======== 

Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Director - General, 
Distinguished delegates, 
At the outset, on behalf of the Delegation of Viet Nam, may I extend our warmest congratulations to you, Mr. Chairman, on your election as Chairman of this Eleventh Session of the Conference of the States Parties. Our congratulations also go to the other members of the Bureau. I also wish to extend my salutation to all other Delegates to this Session. The Vietnamese Delegation is confident that under Mr. Chairman’s able leadership along with the sense of responsibility of all delegations, our Session will be crowned with success.  
Mr. Chairman, 
Today, the number of Member States to the Convention has reached 181. The continuous and rapid increase in the Convention membership since its entry into force has proved the universality and effectiveness of the Convention. This also reflects the desire and commitment of the majority of the international community to build a peaceful world free from chemical weapons.  
The past 8 years since Viet Nam became a Member State to the Convention have witnessed the goodwill, continued endeavour and efforts by the country’s National Authority for the Implementation of the Convention to fulfil Viet Nam’s commitment under the Convention. The Decree No. 100/2005 CP–ND on the Implementation of the Convention, promulgated by Vietnamese Government in 2005 and those relevant provisions in the Vietnamese Penal Code (1999) provide a comprehensive set of both administrative measures and criminal punishments, giving the proper legal framework for the effective implementation of the Convention in Viet Nam. In deed, Viet Nam has strictly fulfilled its obligations as a State Party to the Convention, including those related to finance, notification and declaration. The good results of those industrial inspections carried out by the OPCW in Viet Nam since 2003 have demonstrated the authenticity of the country’s declaration to the OPCW and its attitude of goodwill, cooperation and its commitment to the Convention. 
Over the past few years, Viet Nam has always received active cooperation and support from relevant parties in building and developing its capacity of implementing the Convention. On this occasion, I would like to express our recognition and high appreciation vis-à-vis the valuable supports from the OPCW Secretariat, the European Union and the States Parties to the Viet Nam’s National Authority for the Implementation of the Convention. Those supports have been considerably contributing to the effective implementation of the Convention in Viet Nam. We hope that the Technical Secretariat as well as the other States Parties will continue to extend their support and assistance to Viet Nam. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The year 2006 witnessed a new higher stage in the ever-growing cooperative relationship between Viet Nam and the OPCW with the visit to Viet Nam from 25th to 27th September by His Excellency Ambassador Rogelio Pfiter, Director–General of the OPCW at the invitation of Vietnamese government. The major outcome of these activities is reflected in the high appreciation by the OPCW leader for the efforts Viet Nam has deployed and the achievements it has gained in implementing the Convention as well as the common commitments by both Viet Nam and the OPCW to the main goal of the CWC. In this regard, Viet Nam has shown it goodwill to be more proactive in universalizing and supporting the implementation of the Convention at sub-regional level, including the close cooperation with the Technical Secretariat in organizing in 2007 the conference on customs issues relevant to the implementation of the Convention in ASEAN.  
Mr. Chairman, 
In our view, verification mechanism is necessary to ensure the implementation of the Convention, but should not be a burden for States Parties with chemical industry of small scale and no facilities of scheduled toxic chemicals. In this regard, we hope that consensus would soon be reached over the OCPF site selection methodology, ensuring objectivity and fairness in compliance with the spirit of the Convention.  
The effective implementation of the Convention requires the endeavour of all the States Parties in further control towards the complete elimination of chemical weapons as well as the reasons for producing them and in prohibition of the use of chemical weapons by warring parties or terrorists in order to allow chemicals to only serve the human beings with the goals of peace and prosperity. 
We are of the view that to reach the above goals, the States Parties should exert more efforts to universalize the Convention; ensure the effective operation of the OPCW and the strict fulfilment of their obligations under the Convention; besides, fairness, indiscrimination, respect for national legitimate security interests and sovereignty of all the States Parties must be ensured. 
Viet Nam supports efforts made by the African Group concerning the establishment of an OPCW Office in Africa. Viet Nam also supports the draft Decision on tenure policy for the consideration of this Session of the Conference of States Parties and expresses its strong view that the process of employment of personnel in the Technical Secretariat continue to ensure fairness, transparency and equitable geographical distribution. Furthermore, Viet Nam welcomes efforts made by the related parties in preparation towards the 10th Anniversary of the EIF of the CWC and strongly believes that the event will serve to promote greater awareness of and wider knowledge about the CWC and the OPCW. 
Viet Nam believes that the implementation of the Convention will promote international trade of chemicals. Thus, international cooperation activities in the fields of chemistry in particular, as well as economy and technique in general, in accordance with Article 11 of the Convention, need to be reinforced. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Nine years have passed since the Convention came into force; Viet Nam appreciates the efforts and the achievements of the Technical Secretariat and the States Parties in the implementation of the Convention. Numerous challenges, however, still lie ahead of us in the path towards a complete implementation. Viet Nam is confident that with the continued efforts of the OPCW and the comprehensive support and cooperation of the States Parties, those challenges can be transformed into opportunities to reach the set goals. Viet Nam commits to work wholeheartedly with other States Parties for the goal of a peaceful and stable world free from chemical weapons – a kind of weapon of mass destruction threatening the human beings. 
May I wish this Eleventh Session to conclude in success, 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, 
Thank you, distinguished Delegates, for your attention. 
SPEECH DELIVERED BY THE DEPUTY MINISTER OF FOREIGN 

AFFAIRS OF THE REPUBLIC OF ZAMBIA, HON. MIKE 
MULONGOTI, MP. AT THE 11TH CONFERENCE OF STATES 
PARTIES TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
THE HAGUE-THE KINGDOM OF THE NETHERLANDS, 5TH -8TH 
DECEMBER 2006 

Mr. Chairman, 
On behalf of my delegation and indeed the Government of the Republic of Zambia, I wish to congratulate you on your election as Chairman of this 11th Conference of States Parties. I am confident that under your wise leadership, the Conference will be successfully concluded.  
May I also take this opportunity to recognize and salute the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Jose Antonio Arrospide for his indisputable excellent service during his Chairmanship of the Tenth Conference of States Parties. I also wish to congratulate the newly elected Bureau members of this 11th Session of the Conference. 
I also wish to join other delegations to express our gratitude to the Director General, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter for the explicit presentation of his detailed report which shall immensely facilitate the deliberations of this Conference.  I also wish to pay tribute to the Director General and the OPCW Secretariat for the warm reception accorded to me and my delegation since our arrival to this beautiful city which also holds a unique place in the history of the fight against Chemical Weapons.  
Mr. Chairman, 
On behalf of His Excellency, the President of the Republic of Zambia, Mr. Levy P. Mwanawasa (SC) and the Government, I wish to reaffirm our commitment to general and complete disarmament. It is in this regard that 
2 

my President sent a delegation to this Conference as a means of supporting international efforts at addressing this worrisome issue. Mankind must redeem itself by saying no to weapons of mass destruction. We must make the world a safe place for ourselves and for the future generation. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My Government recognizes the need for universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention and for this reason Zambia became a signatory State to the Chemical Weapons Convention on 13th January 1993 and subsequently ratified the same on 9th February 2001. By doing so, Zambia joined many other nations in the global effort towards the prohibition of chemical weapons. Chemical weapons are indeed of great concern for the international community, as they are Weapons of Mass Destruction that can be used by terrorists, including irresponsible individuals.  As you may be aware, it was at this Conference where the agreement to abstain from the use of projectiles, whose object was the dissemination of harmful gases was arrived at. However, this did not prevent the use of chemical weapons for warfare during the First World War. Zambia in this regard welcomes the newest States Parties to the Convention. 
As a member of the African Union (AU) and Non Aligned Movement (NAM) and indeed the United Nations (UN) family, Zambia is proud to stand by the positions made at these levels of multilateralism with regard to the CWC. We shall therefore continue to work hand in hand with our colleagues in ensuring that general and complete disarmament is an achievable dream. 
3 

Mr. Chairman, 
You will remember that in 1925, the Geneva Protocol prohibited the use of asphyxiating, poisonous and other gases or bacteriological methods in warfare. It however, did not forbid the development, production, stockpiling or deployment of chemical and biological weapons nor did it provide mechanisms for dealing with violations. That is the reason why negotiators were driven towards the final treaty that eventually led to the success of the United Nations negotiating Conference on the Convention on Chemical Weapons in Paris, France in January, 1989. Suffice to say that in February, 1993, when the Convention was opened for signature, Zambia was among the first countries that signed. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Zambia is in the process of domesticating the Convention; the bill will be tabled before Parliament for enactment early next year. In the same vein Chairperson, I wish to state that while we shall domesticate the Convention, there will be need to build capacity of our personnel to be able to deal effectively and decisively with all matters related to this dangerous phenomenon. It is in this regard that I wish to pledge my Government’s support for all programmes that will be made available to it by the Technical Secretariat in order to strengthen our capacities to deal with any possible occurrences. 
Mr. Chairman, 
4 

As a developing country, Zambia attaches great importance to chemical science for its development. As such we support all efforts that will promote the peaceful uses of chemicals to the benefit of our people who are in dire need for answers to their economic problems. We in Zambia will remain open to any efforts that will be directed towards achieving our development agenda in this regard. 
Mr. Chairman, 
It is a well appreciated fact that OPCW has offered technical assistance to Member States, including Zambia, with respect to the implementation obligations of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  Zambia wishes to thank the European Union through the OPCW for the donation of analytical laboratory equipment worth 100,000 Euro to the Zambia National Authority. My Government is happy that the OPCW has also expressed willingness to assist in the training of personnel to run the laboratory. We are confident that the OPCW will continue rendering its assistance, in all the other areas that will ensure successful implementation of the CWC programmes. Mr. Chairman, in the spirit of international cooperation, Zambia is willing to work out modalities through the OPCW to make the facility accessible in the region. 
5 

Chairman, 
Africa is a crucial factor in international cooperation, more so with issues of collective international agreements. It is in this regard therefore, that I also wish to state that for the full and effective participation of Africa in realising the obligations States have set themselves under the Convention, there is need for the OPCW to look into the even distribution of employment opportunities for its African partners. I am therefore confident that there will be more meaningful participation from the African Region when more of its citizens are involved in the day to day operations of the OPCW. The employment of more Africans in the Organisation will only further strengthen Africa’s commitment in the realisation of the objectives intended under the CWC. 
Mr. Chairman, 
As we are all aware, the Chemical Weapons Convention mandates the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW) to eliminate the scourge of chemical weapons for good and to verify the destruction of the declared chemical weapons stockpiles within the stipulated deadlines. In this regard, Zambia has therefore observed with satisfaction, the spirit in which negotiations to implement the CWC have been conducted. We appreciate that it is due to this spirit of magnanimity and cooperation that there has been considerable success in implementing the Convention. We therefore strongly plead that the spirit of persuasion should continue in order for us to build on the gains we have made so far. The idea of instituting sanctions on those who have not yet complied with the requirements may 
6 

retard that progress, unless they are intended to coerce those deliberately resisting the requirements as stipulated under the Convention. We are convinced that the world has shown collective resolve on the matter and there is need to therefore continue to support this collective spirit and wisdom. I know there is impatience towards achieving this necessary objective, but we must be mindful that there is more to be achieved through persuasion than through confrontation. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The Government of the Republic wishes to echo the concerns expressed by other delegations about the current pace of the destruction process. We salute those States Parties whose commitment to the destruction of the chemical weapons stockpiles has been demonstrated by their zeal in meeting the agreed set deadlines i.e. 2012 and it is hoped that this final deadline will be strictly observed. 
I want to conclude by saying my Government acknowledges the very important fact that domesticating the Chemical Weapons Convention will enhance Zambia’s security and therefore, enhance our national and global interests. 
Despite the fact that Zambia does not manufacture and does not possess chemical weapons, the Zambian Government recognises the great importance of enacting the legislation for the following reasons: 
7 

Firstly, since one of the objectives of the OPCW is to promote international cooperation in the peaceful uses of chemistry, Zambia also stands to benefit in this regard through the transfer of technology, material and equipment for peaceful purposes in the chemical field. 
Legislation will also create a national legal framework for the State to effectively implement the provisions of the Convention. In this regard, I wish to mention that my Government will be more than willing to cooperate with the OPCW in facilitating the proposed SADC regional training workshop for customs officials some time next year. I am therefore personally eager to hear what proposals the OPCW has for hosting this workshop. 
Lastly, let me reaffirm Zambia's commitment to efforts to strengthen the global efforts to adhere to the CWC. We believe that we are part of the greater family of nations determined to preserve mankind and ready to advance peace and security for all. This can be assured by eliminating all those weapons that threaten the future of mankind.  
I thank you. 
8 



