STATEMENT 
TO THE THIRTEENTH SESSION OF  
THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO  
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

BY 

H.E. MS LYDIA MORTON 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF AUSTRALIA TO THE OPCW 
THE HAGUE, 3 December 2008 
(check against delivery) 
2 

Mr Chairman 
Let me join other speakers in congratulating you on your election as Chairman of the thirteenth Conference of the States Parties.   
The Australian delegation looks forward to working with you to help ensure this Conference concludes successfully with outcomes supporting the full achievement of the goals of the Chemical Weapons Convention.   
Mr Chairman 
The Second Review Conference of the Chemical Weapons Convention held in April this year has reaffirmed the continuing relevance and importance of this Treaty to our shared goals of complete chemical weapons disarmament and non-proliferation.  States Parties renewed their commitment to the Convention and we applaud the efforts made by States Parties in producing a consensus report under difficult circumstances.  We especially appreciate the follow-up by the Technical Secretariat in compiling an inventory of actions needed to implement the recommendations of the Review Conference, and lend our support to their realisation. 
We are pleased that membership of the Convention continues to grow and is soon to reach 185 States Parties. We particularly welcome the announcement of Lebanon’s pending accession to the Convention. 
We are also encouraged by the recent progress in chemical weapons destruction activities, and commend “A State Party” for being the second Member State to have completely destroyed its entire declared chemical weapons stockpile since the Convention entered into force. We welcome the ongoing destruction efforts by the remaining four Chemical Weapon Possessor States. We welcome the United States and the Russian Federation’s agreement to host visits by Executive Council delegations to their chemical weapons destruction facilities. Australia regards these visits as an important transparency and confidence-building measure and therefore looks forward to their continuation. There is little doubt, however, that sustained effort will be required by chemical weapon Possessor States to ensure that the outstanding 58 percent of declared chemical weapon stockpiles are verifiably destroyed within their extended deadlines.   
Mr Chairman 
Universality of the Convention and full adherence to all of its provisions are integral to international efforts to prevent chemical weapons from being developed or acquired.  We therefore commend the Director-General, the Technical Secretariat and States Parties for their continued efforts to bring those outside the Convention into full membership and to ensure that further progress is made towards full implementation of Convention obligations by States Parties. 
Implementation of Article VII, in particular, has been identified in the 2003 Action Plan and subsequent Conference decisions as requiring further attention. It is important therefore, to continue to build upon and expand on current progress in this regard.  Australia will continue to do what it can to assist requesting States Parties to achieve these Convention requirements, especially in our region. 
3 

Mr Chairman 
I would like to turn now to the work of the industry cluster.  We especially welcome the appointment of representatives from Italy and South Africa to facilitate industry cluster consultations, on low concentration thresholds for Part A Schedule 2 chemicals and enhancement of declarations of other chemical production facilities (OCPFs), respectively. We will continue to work with delegations to reach agreement on establishing appropriate low concentration thresholds for declarations of the highly toxic Schedule 2A/2A* chemicals, in order to finally close this gap in the Convention’s verification regime.    
Australia strongly supports the commencement of work on revising the declaration format for OCPFs to ensure that the Technical Secretariat’s limited inspection resources are directed to the most relevant facilities.  In this regard, we fully support the Director-General’s and Technical Secretariat’s papers proposing a number of measures to achieve this end. We recognise that, at some stage, there will be a need to continue consultations on other outstanding industry cluster issues, including on a mechanism for inclusion of States Parties’ proposals in the methodology, as provided for in the Verification Annex.  Australia intends to implement the recommendations of the Director-General’s paper in its next declaration. 
In the meantime, we look forward to assessment of the effectiveness of the Director-General’s revised selection methodology for inspections of OCPFs that commenced at the beginning of this year. 
We welcome agreement by the 53rd Session of the Executive Council on the “Guidelines regarding declarations of import and export data for Schedule 2 and 3 chemicals” (EC­53/DEC.16, dated 27 June 2008). Australia supports the draft decision to clarify and standardise trade declarations in order to reduce discrepancies.  While conscious of the complexities of this issue, we look forward to the approval by the Conference of this decision and strongly encourage States Parties to adopt the necessary domestic measures to implement these guidelines as soon as possible. 
Mr Chairman 
Australia views sampling and analysis (S&A) as an important verification tool that is mandated by the Convention for facilities producing or using Schedule 2 chemicals above inspection thresholds. In February this year, Australia received its first Schedule 2 inspection involving S&A. This inspection proceeded smoothly, due to the cooperation of the inspected facility and the assistance provided by Australia’s Schedule 1 Protective Purposes facility, which hosted the off-site analytical laboratory for the inspection.   
Given the additional cost and resources needed for S&A, Australia believes that this tool is best utilised for verification of declared facilities, including multipurpose OCPF plant sites, that pose the highest risk to the object and purpose of the Convention.  We look forward to reviews of the current arrangements for S&A and to discussions among States Parties and the Technical Secretariat as to the utility of the proposal to extend S&A to Schedule 3 facilities and other chemical production facilities further into the future. 
Mr Chairman 
4 

We support the Technical Secretariat’s draft budget for 2009 and welcome the fact that it is once again a zero-nominal-growth budget, while also recommending an increase in OCPF inspections. 
Increasing the number of OCPF inspections goes to the very heart of the non-proliferation goals of the Convention, because only 12% of the 4,500 OCPF sites declared to the OPCW have been inspected to date. With more and more OCPF sites being declared each year, the OCPF inspection rate will decline further below the already meagre current level of 2.6% per annum. Australia is concerned that this low and declining rate of inspection does not provide sufficient assurance that all State Parties are fully meeting their non-proliferation obligations under the Convention. 
This budget, however, relies on States Parties meeting their financial contributions in full and on time, and we urge all member states to do so.   
Australia also supports measures to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of the Convention’s verification regime within the limited resources available. One means to achieve this objective is the wider acceptance by States Parties of sequential inspections. Copies of a national paper on sequential inspections (RC-2/Nat.6, dated 8/4/08) that we released at the Second Review Conference are available from the OPCW’s website and external server. 
Mr Chairman 
The world continues to face new security challenges, including the threat or possible use of toxic chemicals by non-state actors, including terrorist groups.  Article X of the Convention provides for States Parties to cooperate with the OPCW’s technical assistance in responding to the hostile use of chemicals. In this regard, Australia hosted a visit by the Technical Secretariat in June this year, to clarify what might be provided in case of a request for assistance.  
Article VII of the Convention is also important in this regard. States Parties contribute to reducing the risks of chemical weapons being used by non-state actors and terrorists by ensuring that they fully comply with their Convention obligations to establish national controls. 
We also see opportunities for States Parties to cooperate under Article XI on promoting the safety and security of chemicals and chemical facilities and sites. We again reiterate our view that the OPCW has an important facilitative role to play. Various UN resolutions, and the OPCW itself, recognise the Technical Secretariat’s capacity in this regard.  We were encouraged by the Director General’s announcement at the 54th Session of the Executive Council that the Technical Secretariat is preparing a paper exploring how the OPCW could make a contribution to enhancing the security of chemical facilities. 
We appreciate State Party efforts to facilitate discussions, including in the Open-ended Working Group on Terrorism, and support this work.    
Mr Chairman 
Australia looks forward to further close cooperation with the Technical Secretariat and other States Parties in the coming year as our term on the Executive Council continues. 
Thank you Mr Chairman. 
OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Thirteenth Session  C-13/NAT.5  
2 – 5 December 2008  2 December 2008  
ARABIC and ENGLISH only  
LEBANON  

STATEMENT DELIVERED BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF LEBANON, 
AMBASSADOR ZEIDAN AL-SAGHIR, 
TO THE THIRTEENTH SESSION OF 
THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO 
THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
2 DECEMBER 2008* 


Your Excellency, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya, Chairman of the Conference, 
Your Excellency, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, Director-General 
Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 

Allow me first to extend my thanks to the Chairman of this Conference and to his Excellency the Director-General for giving me this opportunity to address you, although Lebanon is still an Observer State. 
I have the honour to be the first official to address this august body on behalf of Lebanon. 
It is my pleasure to inform you that Lebanon has taken the final step towards completing the procedures for joining the Chemical Weapons Convention, and deposited its instrument of accession thereto on 20 November of this year. 
In accordance with paragraph 2 of Article XXI of the Convention, Lebanon will become a State Party on the 30th day following the date of deposit of its instrument of accession, i.e. as of 20 December this year. 
I am overwhelmed with joy and pride when I see all the regional groups and other states giving Lebanon this general welcome as it joins this Organisation. Therefore, I wish to extend my warm thanks to all of you who have welcomed and congratulated Lebanon on joining this Organisation. I will not mention any names, lest I forget someone, so I extend my thanks to all of you. 
I must commend and warmly thank the Technical Secretariat of the Organisation for the important role it played by twice sending a high-level delegation to Lebanon to hold consultations with the Lebanese government and provide it with assistance to initiate the implementation of the provisions of this Convention. 
* 
Lebanon participated in the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties as an Observer State, and the Conference granted it the right to deliver this statement during the general debate. 
CS-2008-5772(E) distributed 07/01/2009 *CS-2008-5772.E* 
C-13/NAT.5page 2 
Lebanon is preparing to take the first steps towards the implementation of all the provisions of this Convention and its obligations thereunder. It will inform the Technical Secretariat of the Organisation of its efforts to implement these provisions and shall not fail to seek assistance, technical or otherwise, whenever necessary, for the implementation of its obligations. 
By acceding to this Convention, Lebanon is affirming its belief in peace and its endeavours to achieve a world free of chemical weapons and all weapons of mass destruction, which have inflicted the heaviest losses on mankind. 
Lebanon’s record is testimony that it has never considered using, stockpiling, proliferating, producing or trading in chemical weapons. Therefore we consider that we have been committed to this Convention even before our accession thereto. 
We are convinced that chemical weapons constitute a threat to mankind and that their victims are the civilians, the unarmed and the innocent. Lebanon is considered a leading example with regard to the protection of civilians during armed conflicts, based on principles in which we believe, which we uphold and comply with in real life, and to which we have been unwaveringly committed. Our accession to this Convention truly reflects this commitment. 
The universal membership of this Organisation is a lofty goal which we must continue to pursue with unfaltering efforts. Thanks to the efforts that this Organisation has made and continues to make, its membership has increased from 121 on 29 April 1997, the date of entry into force of this Convention, to 185 in 2008, which augurs well for our Organisation being close to achieving universal membership. We should not despair of convincing those who have not yet been convinced of the benefits of a world free of chemical weapons and of all types of weapons of mass destruction. 
The last century has witnessed two world wars and many other armed conflicts, in addition to troubles and terrorist acts. This has inflicted awful sufferings on mankind. Millions of people have been killed and millions of others maimed. The damage inflicted by wars is a lingering testimony to what man can commit against his brothers in humanity. 
The Middle East region has been experiencing instability for more than sixty years, during which we have suffered from the ordeals of wars waged against us by Israel and from the damage, human casualties and destruction of infrastructure which were inflicted thereby to an extent that is hard to conceive. 
Lebanon has chosen the path of peace built on justice, respect of sovereignty and non-aggression. This path, which all of us believe in, is the one that has been charted by the United Nations and its Charter since its inception in 1943. 
Mr Chairman, 
The first paragraph of the preamble of the Chemical Weapons Convention summarises the most important objective that mankind must strive to achieve. It calls for the prohibition and elimination of all types of weapons of mass destruction. This is a primary objective that we should continually keep in mind. 
The implementation of Security Council Resolution 1540, which was issued in 2004, after the entry into force of the Chemical Weapons Convention, represents an important part of the 
C-13/NAT.5page 3 
work of this Organisation, as it covers nuclear, chemical and biological weapons considered to be a threat to international peace and security. 
Let us act together, everyone in his respective field of competence, to free our world from all types of weapons of mass destruction. Let the Middle East region, which is the cradle of revealed religions, be also the cradle of peace, by making it free of all types of weapons of mass destruction, i.e. nuclear, chemical and biological weapons. 
Last year, our Organisation celebrated the tenth anniversary of its creation. As we look back on what has been accomplished over the last ten years, we note that much has been achieved and that many a task also lies ahead of us. 
Achieving our objective of a world totally free of chemical weapons on 29 April 2012 will be a source of joy for the world and pride for our Organisation. This hope, as was said by his Excellency the Director-General at the United Nations, during the celebrations of the tenth anniversary of the entry into force of this Convention, “demands unremitting efforts on the part of major possessor states”. 
Mr Chairman, 
I am eagerly looking forward to participating in your work as a representative of a State Party. I express once again our commitment to, and compliance with, the provisions of this Convention and its annexes, as a commitment on our part to the culture of security and peace, and wish that this statement be distributed to all participants of this Conference as one of its documents. 
Thank you. 
- - - o - - -

OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Thirteenth Session C-13/NAT.9 2 – 5 December 2008 12 December 2008 ENGLISH and SPANISH only 
STATEMENT BY THE HEAD OF THE DELEGATION OF CUBA 
TO THE THIRTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE  
OF THE STATES PARTIES 
(ITEM 17 OF THE AGENDA IN RELATION TO THE IMPLEMENTATION  
OF ARTICLE XI OF THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION) 
THE HAGUE, 5 DECEMBER 2008 

Thank you Mr Chairman. 
The delegation of Cuba wishes to express its sincere gratitude to the delegation of China for its dedication and effort in the facilitation of such a very complex matter as the full implementation of Article XI of the Convention.  In this context, I feel obliged to give a special mention to our dear colleague Mr Li Hong. 
Since the Tenth Session of the Conference, this matter has certainly been one requiring the 
attention of the States Parties, which has been duly reflected in the relevant documents of our 
Organisation, the OPCW. 
My delegation also wishes to express its gratitude to the Technical Secretariat and to all delegations which in a constructive and proactive manner have favoured during this period a certain rapprochement among States Parties in the understanding and the will to implement this important provision of the Convention. 
Furthermore, my delegation wishes to thank all delegations which, respectfully and in a sensible manner, have supported the Cuban proposal for an Article XI workshop which constitutes an additional element that, in our view, could pave the way for this complex negotiation. 
The approach to this proposal is essentially pragmatic and is closely related to the principles on which is based the interpretation that we the poorest countries, including those that form the Non-Aligned Movement, make the “full implementation of Article XI of the Convention” a widely known concept in this Organisation. 
From an operational point of view, the above-mentioned proposal comprises some challenges and complexities that we need to face if we really want to accomplish the common objective of the full implementation of Article XI.  This proposal is based on specific ideas and contributions that have been presented, which nonetheless have not produced the necessary progress. 
CS-2008-5790(E) distributed 15/12/2008 *CS-2008-5790.E* 
C-13/NAT.9 page 2 
The Cuban proposal also represents a challenge for our own country, which has been blockaded and besieged for almost 50 years by the biggest power in the world.  We have taken on this challenge, which we have decided to share with the States Parties, because we believe in the principles of interaction and multilateralism as ways to achieve a better world. For this reason, the delegation of Cuba to the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention appeals to and calls upon all States Parties to increase their efforts and to devote determination and perseverance to the negotiation process that will lead us to the full and effective implementation of Article XI of the Convention. 
Cuba will maintain its unlimited commitment, as it has done until now, to the implementation of all provisions of the Chemical Weapons Convention, and will keep working with all the States Parties, as always, along this very route. 
The Cuban delegation respectfully requests the Chairman of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention to treat this statement as an official document of the Conference. 
Thank you. 
- - - o - - ­
STATEMENT OF CANADA 
THIRTEENTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
DELIVERED BY 
H.E. AMBASSADOR JIM WALL 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA 
TO THE 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

THE HAGUE 
DECEMBER 2, 2008 
(CHECK AGAINST DELIVERY) 

Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Director-General, Excellencies, distinguished Delegates and Honoured Guests: 
I should like to join with the other speakers in congratulating you on your election as President of the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. I am sure your diplomatic skills will enable us to achieve a successful outcome. 
With 184 countries that have so far ratified the Convention, we are very close to achieving our common goal of universal adherence. Nevertheless, several important States have not adhered to the Convention and we must make every effort to encourage them to join our ranks. To this end, I am pleased to announce that Canada will be providing funds to the OPCW to pursue its outreach activities in an effort to get the remaining countries of the Americas, the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas to ratify the CWC, and to provide technical assistance to the Haitian National Authority. 
The obligation of chemical weapons possessors to declare and verifiably destroy all their chemical weapons stockpiles within established deadlines is a central provision of the Convention. There continues to be reassuring progress, but with well over 50% of total chemical weapons stockpiles still not destroyed we are far from the finish line. Canada has been providing significant support for chemical weapons destruction in the Russian Federation under the Global Partnership Against the Spread of Weapons and Materials of Mass Destruction. Canadian-funded projects totalling over $100 million at the Shchuch’ye chemical weapons destruction facility are now either completed or nearing completion.  In November (2008), Canada and Russia signed a new implementing arrangement which outlines Canada’s contribution of approximately $100 million for destruction process equipment required for the two main destruction buildings at the Kizner chemical weapons destruction facility. 
The interim site-selection methodology for inspections of Other Chemical Production Facilities (OCPF), implemented since the beginning of this year, is already delivering expected results. A cursory analysis of the distribution of inspections in the first ten months, by regional groups, shows an increase in the number of inspections in countries with a higher number of declared OCPFs and a comparable reduction in countries with fewer facilities. This translates into a more equitable distribution of inspections, that is an increase in the number of inspections for WEOG and Asia Group and a decrease for other regional groups. 
More, however, needs to be done to improve the efficiency of the industry verification system. For instance, it is widely recognised that the information contained in OCPF declarations is insufficient to allow the Technical Secretariat to make an informed decision when selecting sites for inspection that are relevant to the Convention. 
The Director General’s proposals to enhance the information on the characteristics of plant sites contained in OCPF declarations will contribute to solving this problem.  The use of Standard International Trade Classification (SITC) sub-codes to identify sites that produce high volume chemicals of low relevance to the Convention will go some way towards increasing the inspection efficiency.  A further step in this direction would be the provision of supplementary information on the type of processes and equipment configuration. We strongly support the Director General’s proposals and I am pleased to announce that Canada will start implementing both these proposals on a voluntary basis starting in 2009, with the submission of its Annual Declaration of Past Activities for 2008. We encourage other States Parties to do the same. 
The Second Review Conference allowed us to reaffirm our collective commitment to the Convention and the implementation of all its provisions. The final document will guide our future work over the next few years in making sure that the OPCW can continue to adapt to changing circumstances. It should be noted, however, that the polarised and often heated debates between States Parties distracted the Review Conference from its main objective which was “to take into account any relevant scientific and technological developments”. We hope that this Conference, along with the work of the Executive Council, will steer this organisation toward meeting current and future challenges. 
As we are embarking on the last phase of CW destruction, the OPCW must continue its efforts to gradually shift the balance of its resources towards non-proliferation measures. As demilitarization winds down, industry verification will rise in relative importance in international security. It also will be necessary to steadily increase the number of Article VI inspections, particularly OCPF inspections, as the number of inspectable OCPF sites continues to grow. In terms of the 2009 budget, it seems to us that the Director-General has put forward a good proposal. The current number of OCPF inspections, at 118, is very small compared to the total number of inspectable OCPF sites, at 4,533.  In fact, it is 2.6%. 
Canada therefore fully supports the Director-General’s proposal for a modest increase in the number of these inspections in 2009. We do not see this as unduly burdensome or inequitable in its application and fail to understand why some countries do.  This Delegation finds it remarkable that so much effort has been expended in the budget deliberations discussing principles underlying the industry verification regime. 
In closing, Mr. Chairperson, may I say that this organisation enjoys an enviable reputation as a highly credible and an effective disarmament and non-proliferation international organisation. This is due to the superb work done by the Director General, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter and all the dedicated staff in the Technical Secretariat. As we embark on new challenges, we are confident that this will continue. 
Seul le texte prononcé fait foi 
ORGANISATION POUR L’INTERDICTION DES ARMES CHIMIQUES 13ème CONFÉRENCE DES ETATS PARTIES 
DÉCLARATION 

prononcée par l’Ambassadeur Dominik M. Alder 
Représentant permanent de la Suisse 
auprès de la OIAC 

Débat général 
La Haye, le 2 décembre 2008 

Check against delivery 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 13th CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 

STATEMENT 
by Ambassador Dominik M. Alder Permanent Representative of Switzerland to the OPCW 
General Debate 
The Hague, 2 December 2008 

Monsieur le Président, 
Permettez-moi tout d'abord de joindre ma voix à celle des intervenants qui ont pris la parole avant moi pour vous féliciter de votre élection à la présidence de la 13ème Conférence des États parties. Ma délégation se réjouit de la perspective de  travailler avec vous au succès de cette conférence, dans un esprit constructif. 
J'aimerais également adresser mes remerciements au Directeur général, S.E. Rogelio Pfirter, pour l'excellent travail qu'il a accompli. Les succès que la Convention a enregistrés n'auraient certainement pas été possibles sans l'expertise avec laquelle il conduit l'Organisation. 
Il y a quelques mois, les États parties à la Convention sur les armes chimiques se sont réunis ici à La Haye pour participer à la Deuxième Conférence d'examen. Un peu plus de dix ans après l'entrée en vigueur de la Convention, cette Conférence nous a fourni l'occasion de dresser un bilan des progrès enregistrés. L'un des points les plus positifs est certainementl'accroissement continu du nombre des États parties à la Convention. Ma délégation aimerait à ce sujet féliciter le Congo et la République de Guinée-Bissau de leur adhésion à la Convention dans le courant de cette année. Nous saluons également la ratification de la CAC par le Liban. Nous avons la satisfaction de noter que la Convention a été ratifiée par 184 États, représentant environ 98% de la population mondiale.  
À mesure qu'approche le délai final pour la destruction des armes chimiques, les débats de la Conférence d'examen nous ont aussi donné une idée des défis qui restent à relever. Permettez-moi donc, Monsieur le Président, d'évoquer certaines des questions qui intéressent plus particulièrement mon pays. 
Le régime de vérification de la CAC est souvent cité en exemple pour d'autres conventions, et il est indubitable qu'il s'est révélé efficace à bien des égards. Toutefois, il subsiste un certain nombre de questions qui demandent notre attention immédiate. 
L'inspection des installations de fabrication de produits chimiques (OCPF) est une question sur laquelle nous ne sommes pas encore parvenus à trouver une solution satisfaisante pour toutes les parties. La Suisse considère comme essentiel que la procédure de sélection des installations observe la totalité des lettres a, b et c du paragraphe 11 de la partie IX de l'annexe relative à la vérification. 
En outre, la Suisse a la ferme conviction que tous les régimes d'inspection figurant à l'article VI doivent inclure une évaluation des risques dans la méthodologie de sélection des sites. L'évaluation des risques ne devrait pas se limiter aux substances chimiques utilisées sur un site, mais il est de la plus haute importance qu'elle s'étende aux processus et non pas seulement aux caractéristiques techniques du site. Sinon, le risque existe que nos inspecteurs ne soient pas envoyés dans les sites industriels les plus pertinents au sens de la Convention. Ce qui, Monsieur le Président, représenterait une certaine perte de temps, d'argent et d'énergie pour tous les États parties et pour l'Organisation elle-même. 
La base de données analytiques centrale de l'OIAC, généralement désignée par le sigle OCAD, est un autre sujet relatif à la vérification qui est au centre des préoccupations de ma délégation. L'OCAD est la plus importante banque de référence vérifiée pour l'analyse des armes chimiques. L’Organisation s’en sert pour ses vérifications. De nombreux États parties utilisent également l'OCAD dans leurs activités concernant l'OIAC. 
La Suisse a informé le Secrétariat technique que le laboratoire de Spiez fournira dans les deux ans à venir, plusieurs centaines de sets de données à inclure dans la banque de données. Mon pays fait don de ces données, volontairement et gratuitement, sans tenir compte de leur valeur marchande considérable. Par le passé, cependant, des données validées ont été bloquées au niveau du Conseil exécutif pendant de longues périodes. La Suisse souhaite sincèrement qu'à l'avenir les données ne seront plus retenues au Conseil exécutif sans explications et qu'elles seront rapidement approuvées.  
Monsieur le Président, 
Comme il a déjà été souligné lors de la Deuxième Conférence d'examen d’avril dernier, ma délégation pense qu'il serait utile d’avoir un débat sur les agents incapacitants, en particulier sur leur statut au sein de la Convention. Nous espérons qu’à l'avenir il pourra être accordé du temps et de l'espace à cette question.  
L'assistance et la protection, telles que définies à l'article X de la Convention figurent depuis longtemps parmi les activités prioritaires de la Suisse dans le contexte de la Convention contre les armes chimiques. Depuis des années, nous organisons dans nos installations de Spiez des cours auxquels participent des experts du monde entier. La Suisse reste disposée à coopérer aux activités liées à l'article X. Mon pays attend avec un vif intérêt la suite des délibérations sur l'article X recommandées par le Conseil exécutif conformément au mandat qui lui a été confié par la Conférence lors de sa douzième session. 
Monsieur le Président, 
Lentement mais sûrement, nous approchons de la date butoir de 2012, ultime limite fixée pour la destruction de tous les stocks d'armes chimiques. La Suisse suit avec un vif intérêtles développements qui se poursuivent dans les États possesseurs de tels stocks. Certaines informations qui lui parviennent sont tout à fait encourageantes. À ce propos, la Suisseaimerait féliciter un État Partie qui a détruit l'intégralité de ses stocks d'armes chimiques. La destruction progresse aussi dans d'autres États parties. Ma délégation est confiante que d'autres pays vont prochainement suivre l'exemple de l'Albanie et d’un État Partie. Cependant, pour certains autres pays possesseurs d'armes chimiques, les nouvelles sontmoins bonnes. La Suisse lance un appel à tous les États parties pour qu'ils fassent tout ce qui est en leur pouvoir pour respecter les délais fixés par la Convention et prolongés par laConférence des États parties. Il en va de la crédibilité de la Convention. 
Monsieur le Président, 
Ma délégation apprécie hautement les efforts du Directeur général pour maintenir une rigueur budgétaire. Nous attendons avec intérêt la décision qui doit être prise pendant laprésente Conférence concernant le budget. Nous en appelons à tous les États Parties de montrer un esprit constructif afin d’arriver à un consensus le plus vite possible. Nous avons noté que la proposition faite par le Directeur général prévoit, pour la quatrième année d'affilée, une croissance nominale zéro du budget. La Suisse s'en félicite. Parallèlement, il est impératif que le futur budget reste suffisant pour permettre à l'Organisation de s'acquitter du mandat qui lui est confié par la Convention. 
Monsieur le Président, 
En conclusion, permettez-moi de revenir brièvement sur la Deuxième Conférence d'examen d’avril dernier. Ma délégation salue les résultats obtenus. Elle est particulièrement satisfaite du fait que nous soyons parvenus à un accord sur un rapport final. En ce qui concerne le processus de négociations, nous comprenons que dans certaines phases, il est utile de se diviser en petits groupes. Néanmoins, nous aimerions rappeler que nous considérons que le processus inclusif est un des piliers du fonctionnement du régime multilatéral. Par le passé, la Convention sur les armes chimiques a été tenue pour l'un des régimes multilatéraux les plus forts qui soient et qui fonctionnement le mieux en matière dedésarmement et de non-prolifération. À nous de faire le nécessaire pour que cette réputation conserve toute sa validité à l'avenir et que les processus demeurent inclusifs.  
Je vous remercie, Monsieur le Président Mr Chairman,  
Let me join the speakers who went before me in congratulating you on your election to the Chairmanship of the 13th Conference of States Parties. My delegation is looking forward to working with you in a constructive spirit in order to make this Conference a success. 
I would also like to thank the Director General, H.E. Rogelio Pfirter, for his excellent work. The Convention’s successes would certainly not have been possible without his expert guidance of the Organisation.  
Only a few months ago the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention met here in The Hague for the 2nd Review Conference.  A little more than 10 years after entry into force of the Convention, this Conference gave us the opportunity to take stock of what we have achieved. One of the most positive aspects is certainly the ever growing number of States party to the Convention. My delegation would like to congratulate Congo and Guinea-Bissau on their accession to the Convention earlier this year. We also congratulate Lebanon on the recent ratification of CWC. We have noted with satisfaction that there are now 184 States Parties to the Convention, and that the Convention covers 98% of the global population to date.  
As we are moving closer to the destruction deadlines, the debates at the Review Conference also gave an indication of the challenges that lie ahead of us. Let me thus, Mr Chairman, turn to some issues of special interest for my country. 
The CWC’s verification regime is often quoted as an example for other Conventions, and there can be no doubt that it has delivered well in many respects. Nonetheless, there are a number of issues that require our urgent attention.  
The inspections of Other Chemical Production Facilities (OCPFs) is one issue on which we have not yet managed to find an arrangement that satisfies all parties. Switzerland considers it crucial that all of the subparagraphs a, b and c of Paragraph 11 of Part IX of the Verification Annex are applied to the selection procedure for OCPFs.   
Furthermore, it is Switzerland’s firm conviction that all inspection regimes under Article VI have to include risk assessment in the site selection methodology. Risk assessment should not be limited to the chemicals used at a site, but, crucially, has to extend to the processes applied, as well as to the engineering characteristics of the site. Otherwise there is a danger that our inspectors are not sent to those industrial sites that are most relevant in the context of the Convention. This, Mr. Chairman, would in turn be a rather inefficient allocation of the time, money and effort of all States Parties and of the Organisation.  
The OPCW Central Analytical Database, generally known as the OCAD, is another verification-related topic that has been the focus of my delegation. The OCAD is the most important validated reference library for chemical weapons analysis to date. It is used regularly by the Organisation in the context of verification. Many States Parties use the OCAD in their OPCW-related activities, too.  
Switzerland has informed the Technical Secretariat that the Spiez Laboratory will, over the next two years, provide several hundred sets of data for inclusion in the database. Although the data carries significant monetary value my country is donating it free of charge and voluntarily. However, in the past, validated data had been held up in the Executive Council for extended periods of time. Switzerland sincerely hopes that such data will in the future no longer be held up in the Executive Council without providing any explanations, but that it will be approved expeditiously.  
Mr Chairman, As already highlighted at the Second Review Conference in April of this year, my delegation feels that a debate on incapacitating agents, in particular on their status within the Convention, would be useful. We are hopeful that further space and time can be allocated to this issue in the future.  
Assistance and protection as defined in Article X of the Convention has long been one of the focal points of Switzerland’s CWC activities. For a number of years we have organised courses at our facilities in Spiez, in which experts from around the world have participated. Switzerland will continue to stand ready to cooperate on Article X activities. My country is also looking forward to the continued deliberations on Article X as recommended by the Executive Council in line with the mandate it was given by the Conference at its Twelfth Session. 
Mr Chairman,  
We are slowly but steadily nearing 2012, the final extended deadline for the destruction of all chemical weapons stockpiles. Switzerland is taking a keen interest in the developments in the possessor states. Some of the news is very encouraging indeed. My country would like to congratulate a State Party for the destruction of its entire stockpile of chemical weapons. Destruction in other States Parties is progressing, too. My delegation is hopeful that a number of other countries will join Albania and a State Party in the near future. Yet, there is less encouraging news from other possessor states. Switzerland appeals to all States Parties to do their utmost to respect the deadlines as established by the Convention and extended by the Conference of States Parties. This is crucial in order to maintain the credibility of the Convention. 
Mr Chairman,  
My delegation appreciates the Director-General’s efforts to maintain budgetary rigour. We are looking forward to a decision on the budget during this Conference. We call on all States Parties to show a constructive spirit in order to reach a consensus as expeditiously as possible. We have noted that for the fourth year in a row, the Director-General has presented States Parties with a zero-nominal growth budget. Switzerland welcomes this. At the same time it is imperative that the future budget remains sufficient to allow the organisation to fully carry out its mandate as defined by the Convention.  
Mr Chairman,  
Let me, in conclusion, briefly turn to the Second Review Conference that took place in April this year. My delegation welcomes the outcome of the Conference. It is particularly satisfied that we managed to agree on a substantive final report. As far as the negotiation process is concerned, we understand the practicality of dividing into smaller groups at certain stages. Nonetheless, we would like to state that we consider an inclusive process one of the pillars of a functioning multilateral regime. The CWC has in the past been held up as one of the strongest and best-functioning multilateral disarmament and non-proliferation regimes. Let us all make sure that this deserved reputation is maintained in the future, and that therefore, the CWC processes remain inclusive.  
I thank you, Mr Chairman.  


OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Thirteenth Session  C-13/NAT.8  
2 – 5 December 2008  3 December 2008  
ENGLISH and SPANISH only  
COSTA RICA  

STATEMENT BY HIS EXCELLENCY, AMBASSADOR FRANCISCO JOSÉ 
AGUILAR URBINA, 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA 
AT THE GENERAL DEBATE HELD ON 3 DECEMBER 2008 

Thank you, Mr Chairman.  
Mr Chairman, Mr Director-General, Excellencies, ladies and gentlemen,  
Mr Chairman, allow me first to express my deep satisfaction at your election to the Chair of this Conference. I extend my Government’s congratulations to you and its pleasure at seeing you at the head of the deliberations that will take place during the coming days.  We wish you every success, as that can only benefit the peace and security of our world.  
On behalf of the Republic of Costa Rica, and on my own behalf, I congratulate and thank your predecessor, His Excellency Mr Abuelgasm Abdelwahid Sheik Idris, for his outstanding work during the last Conference.  
Nor can I fail to mention and renew Costa Rica’s congratulations, and my own, to the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, for his wise and impartial management of the OPCW. My thanks go equally to all staff members of the Organisation for the excellent work they have done throughout this year, as in previous ones. Mr Director-General, this Organisation is a model for disarmament and multilateralism, and your leadership, action and professionalism have been essential in setting the OPCW as a model Organisation.  
For this very reason, I want to give my special thanks to Mr Martin Strub, from the Swiss Mission, for his work during the last months as facilitator for budget issues.  Martin has had to battle with a difficult subject in the days, weeks and months leading up to this week.  I call upon the representatives of the States Parties to bring this matter to a successful conclusion.  
The OPCW is making a supreme effort to achieve the objectives set by the United Nations in the aftermath of the Second World War.  Therefore it is our task to keep our Organisation safe and to ensure that it does not become stagnant, at a time when forces of evil are causing hundreds of thousands of deaths everywhere on the planet. 
Mr Chairman, Costa Rica has decided to participate in this Conference and in this general debate, to reaffirm its commitment to disarmament and multilateralism. My country is 
CS-2008-5786(E) distributed 09/01/2009 *CS-2008-5786.E* 
C-13/NAT.8 page 2 
convinced that disarmament and multilateralism are fundamental for the establishment of more democratic, and more prosperous, societies.  
Costa Rica has no armed forces.  Only last Monday we celebrated the 60th anniversary of the abolition of the Military. Sixty years ago, on the 1st of December 1948, José Figueres Ferrer, an exemplary citizen, short in stature but huge in courage and vision, struck down a battlement from one of the towers of the Bellavista Barracks in San José.  
This deed marked the end of an era of violence, hatred and waste of resources and the beginning of an era in which education, peaceful coexistence, negotiation, respect for human rights and sustainable development have been the priorities of the entire nation.  These are our objectives to this day, and our younger generations are today taught that respect for others is the star that should always be our guide.  
Two weeks ago, the President of Costa Rica, Dr Óscar Arias Sánchez, addressed the Security Council to open Costa Rica’s Presidency of that body.  President Arias requested the unconditional implementation of Article 26 of the Charter of the United Nations.  This provision mandates members of the international community not to squander on armaments the limited human and economic resources of the world.  In Article 26 of the Charter, the words “the least diversion of resources” mean, first and foremost, finding alternatives to excessive military spending that do not damage security. One of those alternatives is to strengthen multilateralism.  As long as nations do not feel protected by strong regional organisations with real powers to act, they will continue to arm themselves at the expense of the development of their peoples – of the poorest, in particular – and at the expense of international security. 
For this reason, my country considers that intergovernmental bodies such as the OPCW are fundamental to the advancement of humankind.  There can be no doubt that the prime objective of this Organisation is disarmament, and that means the destruction of weapons of mass destruction, prohibiting the production and development of them and, above all, prohibiting their use – surely the most irrational of human behaviour.  
With regard to destruction, we congratulate A State Party on having destroyed its chemical weapons stockpiles in the course of this current year.  Also we call upon States Parties which have not still concluded the disposal of their stockpiles to fulfil their obligations within the deadlines set by the CWC.  
As for non-proliferation, States Parties need to adopt their national implementing legislation and submit their declarations in accordance with the CWC.  In this regard, the verification conducted by the OPCW is not to be ignored.  However, we must not use the non­proliferation argument to hinder access to new technologies, to refuse cooperation, or to shackle trade. The CWC is one instrument, and Article VII is just as important as Article XI.  
Mr Chairman, the year now ending has been very productive for Costa Rica as regards continuing the practical application of the CWC. As is well known, we have had our National Authority for many years, and, more recently, enacted legislation to apply the treaty internally. In 2008, activities were conducted in Costa Rica to spread awareness of the CWC by means of seminars held in various institutions. The list of businesses which import and export chemicals covered by the CWC has been expanded and brought up to date, by means 
C-13/NAT.8 page 3 
of registration and inspection. Normative and monitoring documents and experience have been exchanged, both with the OPCW and with the National Authorities of other countries. 
Furthermore, Costa Rica was represented in different activities and training events held during the year in Mexico, Argentina, Ecuador and Finland. The training received in VERIFIN, in Finland, was crucial to the pursuit of the objectives of the CWC. 
Also, as regards the Transfers Regime for fulfilment of the obligations contained in Article VII of the CWC, the General Customs Service has set up a national customs duties structure which follows the recommendation of the World Customs Organisation for identifying the chemicals in Schedules 1, 2, and 3 to the CWC.  Similarly, with a view to facilitating the exchange of information and reducing the number of discrepancies in respect of transfers of chemicals controlled by the CWC, Costa Rica is fostering the recognition at Central American level of national customs tariffs, so that they can be incorporated into the Central American customs structure and be in force at regional level.  
Mr Chairman, Costa Rica does not congratulate itself only on being a country with no armed forces or arsenals capable of threatening the security of any other State.  We Costa Ricans feel pride at being part of a region which has, as a whole, declared its conviction that peace is the only civilised way for the peoples of the world to live together.  We settle our disputes using dialogue and the peaceful means of resolving conflicts that are established by the United Nations Charter.  It is not mere chance that, a few steps from this hall, in the Peace Palace, the International Court of Justice is deciding a large number of cases the parties to which are members of GRULAC.  
It gives us especial pleasure to share a frontier with another country which has also declared peace on the world by abolishing its armed forces – Panama.  Our common border is without doubt the most secure in the world, for it is one along which only dialogue and the brotherly embrace of two fraternal peoples are the weapons in common use. 
However, something which makes feel especially proud to be Latin Americans is the fact that the countries of Latin America and the Caribbean, have for decades – since before there was even a dream of having a treaty to prohibit the production, stockpiling and use of chemical weapons – been complying with what is mandated by the CWC.  It may seem a little strange for me to be saying this – how can one fulfil an obligation before the treaty creating it even exists?  I recall that the destruction of weapons of mass destruction is one which has never arisen in my region, simply because there have never been any in the vast territory between the Rio Bravo in the north and the borders of Antarctica in the south. 
That is why we must redouble our efforts to ensure that the only two States in the inter-American system which are not parties to the CWC – the Bahamas and the Dominican Republic – soon become full members of the group of nations meeting here today  Those two peaceful nations will dignify our deliberations when they are States Parties to the CWC. 
However, just as I lament the fact that there are still two States in the Western Hemisphere which have yet to ratify the CWC, I am nonetheless pleased that we are coming closer and closer to universality.  Costa Rica gives a warm welcome, and extends its arms to embrace the Republic of the Congo, Guinea-Bissau and Lebanon.  There are people living on our territory who have their roots in those three countries, and we are delighted that our relatives across the ocean are now covered by the welcoming blanket of the CWC.  
C-13/NAT.8 page 4 
Mr Chairman, I conclude by saying that my delegation is at your disposal to offer you any support you may consider necessary for our Conference to complete its mission.  
Thank you very much.   
- - - o - - ­
XIII e CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

(The Hague, 2 – 5 December 2008) 
STATEMENT DELIVERED BY H.E.M.BENCHAA DANI, 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE TO THE ORGANISATION FOR THE 
PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 
AND HEAD OF THE ALGERIAN DELEGATION 

The Hague, 2 December 2008 
1 

Mr Chairman, 
Mr Director-General, 
Excellencies, Distinguished Delegates, 

Allow me first of all, to address to you, Mr Chairman, on behalf of the Algerian delegation, my sincere congratulations on the occasion of your outstanding election to chair this 13th Conference of States Parties. This feeling is not only reinforced by the quality of the relationship between our two countries, Algeria and Japan,  as well as by our personal relations but also because of your professional skills and the wisdom from your side we got used to. For all this I can assure you of my personal support,  in my capacity of Chairman of the Plenary Commission,  and of the support of the Algerian delegation in view of your success and that of our work. 
Algeria joins fully the statements of the Group of the Non-Aligned Movement and China, on the one hand, and of the African countries, on the other hand, delivered respectively by H.E.Mr. Oscar de los Reyes, Permanent Representative of Cuba, and the Representative of the Republic of South Africa. 
Mr.Chairman, 
The occasion is given to me, also, to greet a whole year of Arab diplomacy in the service of general and full disarmament, shown at the 12th Session of the Conference of the States Parties as well as the Second Review Conference during which Sudan, Saudi Arabia and Algeria chaired the works. Thus, I am pleased to express all my consideration to your predecessor, Ambassador Idriss, as well as Ambassadeur El Khereedj who deserves to be honoured in particular as he is going to exchange his function of Permanent Representative for other functions in other places. I address my congratulations, at this end of the Arab year also, to Lebanon for having presented us with its impending membership of our Organisation, by deposing on 20 November 2008 the instruments of ratification of the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. So, Beirut has just added an important stone to the edifice of disarmament, making so its contribution to the courageous project of transforming the Middle East in an area free off mass destruction weapons and to which my country adheres fully. After some days Lebanon will be the 185e State Party to our Convention. Algeria welcomes also the invited countries present here among us and in particular, Iraq, in the firm belief that this great country will join soon this Organisation. 
We are gladly grateful to another Permanent Representative, Mr Eric Javitts of the United States of America – who will leave the Hague soon - because of the important work to which he made a contribution over the last years as well as for his professional and humanitarian qualities, the moral values and the positive spirit of wisdom and conciliation that he succeeded in imprinting on our work.  My congratulations are of course addressed to the other members of the Bureau and those among the States Parties elected to the position of directors of this conference. I pay in particular tribute to Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter and to the members of the Technical Secretariat for their exceptional devotion in view of the achievement of chemical disarmament, a project that is of the highest importance for my country. I congratulate the Director General for his edifying opening Statement.    
2 

Mr Chairman, 
Besides the Arab World, Africa has not been kept on the sidelines of this fantastic undertaking. On the contrary, the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons has been reinforced this year by the adherence of two new African States, the Congo and Guinea Bissau, whose participation I welcome today. Henceforth Africa is represented by some fifty States Parties, pending the adherence of Angola, Egypt and Somalia to our Organisation as soon as possible. 
This massive adherence to the Convention shows the growing interest in chemical disarmament and security concerns of a continent, in expectancy of a support of the international community, and whose needs of capacity and equipment reinforcement are most felt. Moreover, it is from this viewpoint that on the initiative of Algeria, the specific Programme for Africa has been created and begins gradually to become established. However, should one congratulate all the actors of the Technical Secretariat for their efforts in favour of its elaboration, a thorough review of the conception of this programme has to be engaged in order to satisfy the ambitions of the Africans. No need to remind that a qualitatively and quantitatively enriched programme should cover most of the responsibilities following on from the provisions of the Convention and namely, in its Articles 7, 10 and 11, and with the aim of course of the reinforcement of security in the African continent.  
From this point of view, Algeria who takes the greatest interest in this praiseworthy initiative, declares itself at the disposal of the international community and the Organisation in view of the reinforcement of this programme and the mobilization of the resources that will be necessary. A sustained appeal is addressed thus to the international community in order that it honours its promises by means of contributions that are likely to finance the projects already registered in this programme. 
It is obvious that in accordance with the conclusions of the Second Review Conference, these deployment will be implemented with the assistance of the African Commission with which the OPCW has already signed a memorandum of understanding as well as with the African Center for Study and Research on Terrorism. My country is ready to host all activities in the framework of the implementation of Article X of the Convention on the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons as it did for the universality and the implementation of Article 7 in Africa.  Algeria continues to be also ready to give assistance to African countries on their request in the framework of the establishment of their national authorities and the implementation of the convention. 
The major part of the credit of this new dynamism in Africa is due to our Director-General who has confirmed, some days ago, in Addis Ababa, the will of the Organisation to make the African Union give its own contribution to the security ambition of our continent. 
Mr Chairman, 
This 13the Session of the Conference of States Parties  follows immediately the Second Review Conference in April 2008 during which my country has tried to give victory to the virtues multilateralism and  transparency, cardinal values that is has defended and assumed from time immemorial. The results of this important event in the life of our Organisation enlighten us and involve us more in an implementation adapted to the priorities and 
3 

challenges of the new century. 
Algeria who has taken part in September 2008 in the visit of a delegation of the Executive Council to the chemical weapons destruction facility of Shchuchye in Russia, appeals urgently on the possessor countries to take the necessary measures in order to comply with the deadline on 29th April 2012, date of the final elimination of this category of weapons of mass destruction. Algeria congratulates a State Party on having completed its process of destruction of its declared stockpiles of chemical weapons. After Albania, it is the second member of the international community that has accomplished its humanitarian obligation of destruction and an act of pacification and securisation of international relationship. 
Mr Chairman, 
This commitment of Algeria extends to all provisions of the Convention that it hopes will be translated on the field without any discrimination, as the purposes of destruction, non proliferation and development are so closely linked. 
In this regard, the responsibilities of my country in the framework of the Articles VI and VII in its capacity of vice Chairman of the Executive Council as well as for its charges of facilitator, also reflect its resolute commitment to work for the achievement of all the aims of disarmament  in the framework of dialogue, objectivity and equity. In this context even if the majority of the States Parties are pleased about the implementation of the new site selection methodology, the fact remains that  much work has still to be done in view of the conception of a final system agreed by the whole of the international community.  The nomination of two new facilitators for industrial question constitutes an enhancement and is a sign of authentic cooperation spirit created and sustained by Algeria.  On the other hand, the consultations on the action plan relating to Article 7  are henceforth marked by a positive approach thanks to the common will to transcend situations of contradiction et because of the efforts of the Organisation that should be sustained and reinforced, creating thus a synergy between States Parties and the Technical Secretariat that would be convenient to develop and to multiply. 
Similarly Algeria continues to denounce the obstacles to which developing countries are subjected in the field of their economic and technological development on the occasion of transactions of chemicals and equipment for the chemical industry or exchanges of scientific and technological information. Algeria calls for a full implementation of the Convention so that no unwarranted restriction of any kind be imposed on activities which are not incompatible. For this the requirement of full application of Article 11 of the Convention remains crucial and a priority. Therefore Algeria supports ongoing consultations conducted by China in view of the elaboration of an action plan and in favour of a permanent dialogue avec all the States Parties and the industrial world as well as a workshop likely to explore the means of implementation of Article 11. Algeria continues to believer firmly that a full and effective implementation of this mainstay of the Convention contributes without any doubt to reinforcing international security. 
Confirmed by the recommendations of the Second Review Conference, the implementation of Article 10 on protection and assistance should be reinforced in order to respond to situations of use or threat of use of chemical weapons.  
4 

In this respect, the national course organised in Algiers from 24th to 28th November 2008 fits totally in this objective assigned by the Convention. It precedes the national and regional exercises that will be hold in 2009 in Algeria. 
Mr Chairman, 
Hit by the bloody and inhuman effects of terrorism, my country remains convinced that this blind scourge has become nowadays a major challenge  for international peace and security against which  the international community has to be mobilized at any moment and at any place in the world. In this infernal spiral imposed by transnational terrorism, the production, threat and use of chemical weapons by non-State forces constitute un new potential danger and objective of humanitarian disaster that one has to evaluate at his right dimension. 
Thanks to the results of the Second Review Conference, our Organisation is henceforth involved in the prevention of chemical terrorism and aware of the risks of the use of toxic products for the purpose of terrorism. Therefore my country considers that the application of new orientations is urgent and calls for the elaboration of effective anti-terrorism measures. My country is ready for all concrete initiatives and actions in view of a conceptualisation of chemical terrorism in order to fight resolutely this imminent danger of proliferation that is likely to endanger the whole mankind. 
Mr Chairman, 
Consultations on the Budget Programme for 2009 are going on in a positive spirit and in the framework of a fruitful dialogue. My delegation makes her contribution in order to bring the last negotiations to a successful conclusion in a collegiate responsibility so that the Budget for 2009 can reflect at the best the policy, the priorities and the main orientations of the Organisation. 
Algeria considers, finally, that the Commission of Contact with the Host State of which it is member should meet more frequently in order to define an  ambitious statute and to speak in favour of appropriate diplomatic facilities. 
5 

Statement by H.E. Mr. J.E. Habibie 
Permanent Representative of the Republic of Indonesia 
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
to the 13th Session of the Conference of States Parties 

Mr. Chairman, 
Allow me to join other delegations, in extending our sincere felicitations to you in assuming the Chairmanship of this year's Conference of States Parties. We are confident, that under your able stewardship, our deliberations will lead to a successful conclusion. 
My delegation wishes to commend the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Abuelgasim Abdelwahid Shiekh Idris of Sudan, for his chairmanship of last year's Conference of States Parties. 
I wish also to seize this kind opportunity to convey our heartfelt condolences and sympathies to the Government and the People of India, for the hideous terrorist attacks in Mumbai. 
Before going further, my delegation also wishes to associate with the statement delivered by Ambassador Oscar de los Reyes Ramos of Cuba, on behalf of Non­Aligned Movement and China. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Eleven years after its entry into force, the Chemical Weapons Convention continues to play an important role in promoting peace and security. 
The Convention is moving closer towards universality. We welcome Lebanon for joining in this important endeavor. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation wishes to underscore Indonesia's steadfast commitment to this Convention, by submitting to your kind attention, the way Chemical Weapons Convention provisions are implemented in Indonesia. 
Significant progress has been made in the effort to implement the Plan of Action on Article VII. 
In this regard, we express our sincere appreciation to the Governments of the Kingdom of the Netherlands and the Kingdom of Thailand, in facilitating the visit of the Indonesian Parliament last year. The visit was for a comparative study, for the drafting of our national legislation. 
1 
Our special gratitude also goes to the Technical Secretariat for their assistance and cooperation. 
On March this year, Indonesia passed the Law on the Use of Chemical and the Prohibition on Use of Chemical as Weapons. 
And a Permanent National Authority will be established in Indonesia, hopefully early next year, as our national law has well been in place for that purpose. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation further wishes to underline, again, the balance among the pillars of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
One: the destruction of chemical weapons should remain the main priority of OPCW. While congratulating parties who have made progress, we note, with great concern, that only 58 percent of the amount of the declared chemical weapons has been destroyed. As April 2012 is fast approaching, we resonate our calls for a strict compliance with this final deadline. 
Two: effective verification is a necessity for attaining non-proliferation and confidence building. Indonesia has no interest in possessing chemical weapons. And the OPCW has conducted, with satisfactory results, 7 verifications and inspections in various industrial sites in Indonesia. 
Three: International Cooperation and Assistance, for us, is the most important element for a free and legitimate trade of chemicals. To our regret, such a trade is still hampered by unwarranted restrictions. We wish this issue to be deliberated and must be attended. 
In connection with efforts to enhance International Cooperation and Assistance and with a view to promoting universality, it is worth considering to hold a meeting in collaboration with sub-regional groups, such as one in our sub-region. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Last but not least. By submitting these attentions, my delegations wish that all the business at this Conference and any other Conferences in the future of this august body will be deliberated accordingly, without ignoring the spirit of transparency and all­inclusiveness, so as not to undermine this Convention. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation wishes to ensure to you of our fullest cooperation and support for the success of this Conference. 
Thank you. 
2 

OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Thirteenth Session C-13/NAT.11 2 – 5 December 2008 2 December 2008 ENGLISH only 
ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 

STATEMENT BY THE DEPUTY FOREIGN MINISTER FOR LEGAL AND 
INTERNATIONAL AFFAIRS OF THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN,  
H.E. SEYED MOHAMMAD ALI HOSSEINI, BEFORE THE THIRTEENTH SESSION 
OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO THE 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 
2 DECEMBER 2008, THE HAGUE 

In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful 
Mr Chairman, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
At the outset, allow me to congratulate you on your election to the Chairmanship of the Conference of the States Parties and wish you every success.  Let me assure you of my delegation’s full support and cooperation in steering this Conference to a successful conclusion. I would also like to express my thanks to the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter and his staff for their tireless efforts and wish them every success.  My sincere thanks also go to Ambassador Tamova of Slovakia for her great contribution to the work of the Executive Council during her tenure. 
Mr Chairman, 
Please let me associate myself with the statement delivered by H.E. Ambassador Reyes of 
Cuba on behalf of NAM CWC States Parties and China.  
The Islamic Republic of Iran’s high record of accession to disarmament instruments is 
exemplary.  Iran is among the original members of all WMD treaties, as well as a signatory to 
many other international disarmament instruments.  
As the last victim of chemical weapons, the Islamic Republic of Iran strongly believes that 
promoting international peace and security is subject to the realisation of a world free from 
threat and existence of weapons of mass destruction. 
We have converged on the OPCW to highlight the importance of the CWC in promoting international peace and security.  The Convention has indeed enshrined at least three decades 
CS-2009-5828(E) distributed 26/01/2009 *CS-2009-5828.E* 
C-13/NAT.11 page 2 
of sincere desire of international community to eliminate an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. 
One day, it was a far-fetched idea to have an agreement on effective measures for the prohibition of development, production, stockpiling and destruction of chemical weapons. We have worked very hard for decades to achieve this valuable document. Now this important instrument is in our possession.  This achievement increases our responsibility to our children and future generations to act in a coherent manner and intensify our collective efforts to achieve the lofty goal of a world free from the horrors of chemical weapons.  
Mr Chairman, 
The CWC is distinct from other disarmament instruments due to the following: 
• 	
Not dividing its States Parties into the privileged and the unprivileged or into haves and have-nots; 

• 	
Requiring a total ban on an entire category of weapons of mass destruction; 

• 	
Having a unique verification system which provides assurance of compliance through various types of inspections; 

• 	
Providing assistance and protection to its Member States against use or threat of use of chemical weapons; 

• 	
Promoting international cooperation on economic and technological development of the States Parties, inter alia, removing all restrictions among themselves in exchange of equipment, material and technology for peaceful purposes 


It is commendable that we have managed to conclude a very fundamental instrument which outlaws a deadly weapon which has caused numerous casualties in the past, the vestiges of which are still lingering.  However, we should not be oblivious of the fact that the objectives of the Convention are yet to be realised. 
Our task has not yet been fulfilled; indeed many things are yet to be done.  Some of these issues are of vital importance to the preservation of the integrity of the Convention; we shall not allow any erosion of the provision of the Convention which would jeopardise our achievements.  
We agreed in the Second Review Conference that the destruction of chemical weapons is essential for the realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention.  Therefore, our focus of attention should be on destruction of chemical weapons, continued existence of which threatens the security of mankind.  
The characteristics of the Convention that I just enumerated, in fact constitute the pillars of the Convention. Therefore, it is worth evaluating whether since the EIF of the Convention our objectives towards strengthening these pillars have been realised or not. 
Mr Chairman, 
Complete and verifiable destruction of chemical weapons and the chemical weapons production facilities is the most fundamental objective of the CWC, which is yet to be achieved. Regrettably, the original deadline, 29 April 2007, set by the Convention for 
C-13/NAT.11 page 3 
completion of the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles was missed.  We welcome the fulfilment of the obligations of some possessor States Parties within the final deadlines for completion of the destruction of their chemical stockpiles within the final deadlines as extended by the Eleventh Conference of States Parties. 
However, bearing in mind that the final extended deadlines are approaching fast and more than 58% of chemical weapons stockpiles are yet to be destroyed. 
The existence of these chemical stockpiles can be potentially viewed as a threat to international security particularly if they by any chance fall into the hands of terrorists.  I would like to reiterate that as EC 54 dealt with the matter and emphasised the timely commencement of destruction activities is very important for the fulfilment of obligations by possessor States Parties, the EC must continue to closely monitor the progress in the destruction programmes of possessor States Parties and provide necessary recommendations to ensure their compliance with the Convention.  We think it is not far-fetched. As the saying goes, when there is a will there is a way. 
Let me now turn to the important issue of international cooperation, which has been constantly highlighted by the NAM CWC States Parties and China, and underlined by the Second Review Conference. We shall not forget that a delicate balance has to be struck between the obligations and rights of the States Parties for promoting the object and purpose of the Convention. 
However, after the passage of eleven years from the operation of the Convention, it is a matter of serious concern that the rights of many developing States Parties under Article XI of the Convention to have access to chemical material, equipment and technology for peaceful purposes have been systematically denied by certain arbitrary export control regimes.  Such an approach has questioned the reliable mechanisms established under the Convention to verify compliance of the States Parties.  Furthermore, it has caused confidence deficit among the States Parties. 
We shall not allow such things to divide the States Parties.  We have agreed to stay within the purview of the Convention to promote our common objectives.  To achieve these objectives we shall work hard to ensure that the rights of the States Parties versus their responsibilities would be fully respected.  Now it is time to devise appropriate mechanisms and draw up a roadmap for the full implementation of Article XI.    
Mr Chairman, 
On protection and assistance against the use or threat of use of chemical weapons, the Second Review Conference noted the importance of achieving and maintaining a high degree of readiness of the Secretariat, as well as the States Parties, with respect to the timely and requisite assistance and protection against the use or threat of use of chemical weapons, and asked for developing measures for emergency assistance to victims of the use of chemical weapons. In this context, our proposal put forward at the Eleventh Conference of the States Parties on the establishment of the "Chemical Weapons Victim's International Funding & Assistance Network" provides a framework for cooperation among the States Parties with regard to the provision of assistance to the victims of chemical weapons as envisaged by Article X of the Convention. 
C-13/NAT.11 page 4 
Mr Chairman,  
We express our warm welcome to Lebanon, the Congo and Guinea-Bissau for their accession to the Convention and assure them of our full cooperation and assistance in implementing the Convention. 
In our view, the universality of the Convention is of utmost importance as it has been reiterated by the Second Review Conference.  In this regard, special attention should be paid to the Middle East region, in particular to the situation of the Zionist regime's chemical weapons programme and capability and its accession to all international disarmament instruments.  
This regime with its weapons of mass destruction, including chemical and nuclear weapons, is the most dangerous threat to regional and international peace and security.  It has to be remembered that Middle East is one of the very few regions in which chemical weapons have been used since the First World War.  
Non-accession of this regime to international WMD treaties and its clandestine programmes have practically jeopardised the lofty goal of the Middle East free from WMD and has become the most serious challenge to the universality of the Convention, which is essential for the realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention. 
Mr Chairman, 
Having the largest number of victims of chemical weapons in the world has strengthened our policy vis-à-vis all kinds of weapons of mass destruction, in particular chemical weapons. The commitment of the Islamic Republic of Iran to the Chemical Weapons Convention goes far beyond that of a merely legal undertaking.  It stems from a bitter national experience of having more than 100,000 casualties victimised by chemical attacks in the aggression of the regime of Saddam Hussein against Iran. 
In order to prevent the recurrence of such tragedies, as witnessed in the aggression of Saddam Hussein against Iran, 1980–88, and to promote international peace and security, those criminals who assisted Saddam in the development and use of such deadly weapons must be brought to justice. 
The perpetrators of such heinous crimes should not enjoy impunity.  It is highly expected that all those countries whose companies or citizens had been involved in such crimes abide by their legal and moral responsibilities and put such perpetrators on trial.   
The Islamic Republic of Iran has shared its invaluable experience in the field of medical treatment of these victims of chemical weapons with the OPCW and its States Parties.  So far with the cooperation of the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW, we have organised nine international medical courses in Tehran with the participation of physicians from a large number of CWC States Parties.  
Mr. Chairman, in conclusion,  
It seems to my delegation that the success of this Organisation is deeply rooted in the following: adherence to the principles of this august body, compliance with a multilateral 
C-13/NAT.11 page 5 
approach, strict observance of transparency, as well as close coordination between the TS as the executive body of the Organisation and the States Parties. 
Last but not least, it would be quite appropriate that the Technical Secretariat continue with an all-inclusive approach by seriously taking into account the views of all interested delegations in preparing the TS substantive documents relevant to the implementation of the Convention. It is crystal clear that any deviation from the above-mentioned principles can be quite detrimental to this successful process, which is highly recommended to be avoided. However, we are highly hopeful that by observing the already enunciated principles, we will as always witness the continued success of this Organisation. 
Thank You 
- - - o - - ­



Statement by Jamaica 
 Delivered by H.E. JOY WHEELER  
Permanent Representative to the Organization for the Prohibition of 
Chemical Weapons 
at the 
 Thirteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties to the 
Chemical Weapons Convention 

The HAGUE, 3RD December 2008 
Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation joins previous speakers in congratulating you and other members of the Bureau on your election and assure you of Jamaica’s support and cooperation as you ably guide the deliberations of this 13th session of the Conference of States Parties towards a successful outcome. 
Let me also use this opportunity to express appreciation to the distinguished Ambassador of Sudan for his efficient oversight of the work of the 12th Session of the Conference of States Parties during the past year. 
At the same time, Jamaica commends the unwavering efforts of the Director General and the staff of the secretariat in promoting the Chemical Weapons Convention and, notes with appreciation, the comprehensive and informative account of the work of the organization in the implementation of the Convention, which will guide our deliberations over the next few days. 
My delegation is pleased to associate itself with the Statement made by the distinguished Permanent Representative of Cuba on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China. 

Mr. Chairman, 
As we continue to face the challenges of a complex international security environment, there is no doubt that grave concerns remain over the threat of weapons of mass destruction and their proliferation and this issue continues, therefore, to feature among the priority areas for attention on the international peace and security agenda. 
1 

In this regard, Jamaica remains resolute in its commitment to the object and purpose of the Chemical Weapons Convention and supportive of the activities of the organization in keeping with our long-standing policy position on non-proliferation and general disarmament. We, therefore, commend the OPCW’S achievement to date and underscore our high regard for the organization’s contribution to this process, which was recently highlighted by the Director General in his presentation to the First Committee Plenary of the United Nations General Assembly. 
In so doing, Jamaica remains steadfast in its adherence to the principles and ideals of multilateralism, with the conviction that multilateral diplomacy must be the axis of all global efforts designed to resolve the issues surrounding international peace and security. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Jamaica considers the universalization process a cornerstone for enhanced international commitment towards effectively reducing the development, production, use and threat of use of all types of weaponry. We, therefore, applaud this OPCW direction and are encouraged by the “almost” universal status of the Chemical Weapons Convention with currently 184 States Parties with the 185th well on its way to becoming a full member.  
We welcome the new members and congratulate them on the important step they have taken. We are confident that their accession to the Convention will have a positive effect on the disarmament process, banning as it does, an entire category of weapons of mass destruction within a framework that allows for strict and effective control and verification. 
We are particularly pleased with the important progress that has been made towards bringing all countries of the Caribbean sub-region under the framework of the Convention. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Recalling our strong commitments at the Second Review Conference which provided a useful opportunity to take stock of our achievements and plan for the future, Jamaica wishes to underscore the importance of the follow-up work necessary to attain the objectives of the Convention. We encourage the organization’s sustained focus on implementing Article XI relating to the peaceful use of chemistry in the 
2 

economic and technological development of States Parties, to facilitate in the shortest possible time, agreement on an acceptable framework, taking into account the interest of all States Parties.  
On that occasion we also underscored the importance of the complete destruction of existing stockpiles of chemical weapons within the stipulated deadline, towards attaining the objectives of the Convention. Jamaica welcomes the fact that we have made progress in this regard and that another state party has completed its destruction process within the mandated timetable. We hope that this will be a strong encouragement to other possessor states as they work towards destruction of their stockpiles as early as possible.   

Mr. Chairman, 
Against the background of an increasingly difficult international financial scenario, Jamaica notes with satisfaction, the constructive efforts made by the secretariat towards the efficient management of the organization’s financial and human resources and, is pleased that once again, we have the proposal for a zero nominal growth budget over 2008, while at the same time, taking into account and seeking to meet the changing needs of States Parties. It is also hoped that we will be able to maintain the current level of assessed contributions as far is realistically possible. We look forward to a satisfactory and speedy conclusion of deliberations on the programme and budget for 2009. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Jamaica welcomes this opportunity to express the highest appreciation to the OPCW secretariat for the ongoing and consistent support under the technical cooperation and other assistance programmes geared towards national capacity-building, enabling and encouraging the peaceful use of chemistry, including through focus on the development and strengthening of chemical industries and providing high-level training for our human resources. We also thank those countries that have partnered with the secretariat, both financially and technically, in making this assistance available, from which Jamaica has benefited considerably. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Jamaica takes seriously its obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention and reiterates its commitment to continue working with the secretariat in fulfillment of same and in advancing the work of the 
3 

OPCW. We remain optimistic that our deliberations at this session of the Conference of States parties will contribute to further progress in the implementation of the Convention. 
It is Jamaica’s wish that this Statement be circulated as an official document of the 13th Session of the Conference of States Parties. 
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
4 

Check against delivery 

Delegation of Japan 

Statement by Mr. Masanori Nishi 
 Director-General 
Abandoned Chemical Weapons Office 
Cabinet Office 
and 
Deputy Director-General 
Minister’s Secretariat 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs 

at 

the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties of the OPCW 
The Hague, The Netherlands 2 December 2008 
Mr. Chairman, Director-General, Your Excellencies, and distinguished delegates, 
At the outset, allow me to congratulate Your Excellency Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan on your election as Chairman of the Conference of the States Parties. I am confident that the Conference will be most successful under your strong leadership and experienced diplomatic skills. I assure you of the Japanese delegation’s full support and cooperation for your efforts to ensure the success of the Conference. I also wish to warmly welcome His Excellency Ambassador Dani of  Algeria to the Chair of the Committee of the Whole. 
My sincere appreciation will equally be delivered to Her Excellency Mrs Oksana Tomova of the Slovak Republic, Chairman of the Executive Council, for her leadership and efforts for the success of the Executive Council. 
1 

Mr. Chairman, 
The Chemical Weapons Convention is the first disarmament and non-proliferation treaty in the history of mankind which aims at elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction. We are all aware that the primary objective and the purpose of the Convention is to eliminate the chemical weapons and reduce the risk of their proliferation. In this connection, I would like to congratulate the completion by A State Party of the destruction of its entire chemical weapons stockpile this July. This was yet another significant achievement and progress made after Albania by A State Party for the realization of the object and purpose of the Convention. We also welcome the significant progress made on Chemical Weapons destruction by other possessor states during the year. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Along with the progressive implementation of the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles by possessor states, it 
2 

would be logical to envisage the possible future orientation of the OPCW activities, as presented by the Director General in his report issued on 27 November 2007, with its emphasis shifting from being mainly a disarmament organization to being primarily a non-proliferation organization, attaching great importance to Universality and National Implementation. Japan has been supporting this approach. Those two major activities need to be supported by International Cooperation and Assistance. And, in our view, assistance activities under this Convention could be meaningful only on the understanding that they contribute to strengthening the disarmament and non-proliferation regimes of the world. Bearing this conceptual understanding in mind, I would like to underline the following four points: namely, universality, national implementation, capacity building with particular emphasis on ensuring safe and secure operation of chemical production, and budget. 
3 

Mr. Chairman, 
Complete exclusion of the possibility of the use of chemical weapons cannot be achieved without universal adherence to the CWC. Japan notes with satisfaction the progress towards achieving the universality of the Convention, resulting in a total of 185 States Parties, and welcomes the recent ratification of the CWC by Lebanon. It is expected that some more countries will join the Convention very soon. The more successful we are, the more difficult it becomes to make further progress on universality since the remaining States not Parties are more hardcore countries. Nevertheless, we must keep this momentum. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My second point is the full implementation of the Article VII obligations under the Convention. Even if we were to achieve universal membership, without effective national implementation of the Convention by all States Parties, the goal of the complete exclusion of the possibility of the use of chemical weapons would 
4 

still be out of sight. It is an important means of fighting against proliferation and chemical terrorism. While we have witnessed a fair improvement since the adoption of the Plan of Action, more progress needs to be made. It is a source of concern to the Japanese delegation that more than half of all States Parties have not yet been able to enact comprehensive legislation. In this connection, those States Parties have not notified should notify the OPCW on the steps they have taken to enact legislation and adopt administrative measures to implement the Convention in accordance with the relevant Conference decisions. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My third point is the International Cooperation and Assistance activities. Promotion of universality and national implementation needs to be supported by technical assistance. Without national capability to implement the obligations under the Convention, States not yet Party may feel unenthusiastic about 
5 

joining the Convention and implementing them. It is worth noting that a significant number of States Parties that have not enacted its national legislation have been seeking advice and assistance from the Secretariat. 
In this connection, I would like to call upon the States Parties and the Secretariat to intensify their efforts in following up the Plan of Action regarding the Article VII obligations, and create conducive environment. On our part, Japan is ready to provide legal and technical assistance for national legislation in cooperation with the Secretariat as we did in Brunei, Iraq, Cambodia, Indonesia and, the Philippines. We will soon have a workshop in Laos in cooperation with the Republic of Korea and the Technical Secretariat. 
Apart from assistance to universality and national implementation, the report issued by the Director-General on 27 November 2007 suggested the possible themes for International 
6 

Cooperation in the areas for ensuring safe and secure operation of chemical production, transportation, and storage facilities. These are very important areas where the practical effect and impact of assistance on the safety of chemical industries can be perceived experientially. The Government of Japan fully agrees with the views expressed by the Director-General. As a matter of fact, Japanese chemical industries have provided opportunities for Associate Programme trainees to be exposed to operational environment of chemical substances control, industry safety management, emissions reduction and other environmental management activities. It is also very important for the prevention of and response to chemical disasters that State Parties share the best of their relevant prevention and response measures. The Japan’s national position paper submitted to the Second Review Conference proposed this idea and requested the Secretariat to consider providing an appropriate forum in this respect. 
Recognizing the importance of safe and secure operation of 

7 

chemical production, transportation, and storage facilities, and also the expertise the OPCW possesses, Japan and other G8 members expect contribution to the G8 Global Partnership for prevention of WMD and related material with a view to sensitizing the matter in a wider international cooperation framework. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My final point comes to budget. In an effort to reinforce the non-proliferation regime of the Convention, it is important to have an efficient and effective organizational structure of the Technical Secretariat by constantly reviewing the human and financial resource allocation, using a scrap-and-build approach, adjusting with the shifting focus of the activities. 
Indeed, within the given resources, efficient and effective resource allocations would make the program activities more viable and accountable. In this connection, Japan welcomes the efforts made by the Director-General to prepare the draft program 
8 

and budget for 2009 with zero nominal growth, for four consecutive years. We encourage the Secretariat to continue to explore cost-saving measures in carrying out its activities. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Along with disarmament, non-proliferation and other important aspects of the Convention, Japan continues to attach top priority to the destruction of Japanese abandoned chemical weapons in China. 
In order to expedite the destruction of some 45 thousand ACWs already recovered and stored in different locations, Japan decided to introduce mobile destruction facilities and announced the bidding to procure the unit on November 14. If the bidding is successful and other preparations go smoothly, Japan expects that the mobile destruction facilities will start operations in Nanjing by early 2010. 
9 

As regards to the ACWs still buried in Haerba-ling, Japan and China are making final preparations to start trial excavation in the second week of this month. The trial excavation is designed to collect more detailed information on the types, numbers and conditions of the buried ACWs with a view to allowing for better planning for the excavation, recovery and destruction of what are considered to be the largest concentrations of ACWs in this remote, mountainous location in China’s northeast. 
In undertaking these and other ACW-related activities, Japan appreciates and continues to count on China’s cooperation as well as the facilitative roles played by States Parities and the Technical Secretariat for the sake of the early destruction of the ACWs according to the Convention. 
Mr. Chairman, 
To conclude my remarks, I would like to reiterate Japan’s unswerving commitment to the realization of the goal of the Convention: a world free of chemical weapons. For that end, 
10 

Japan will spare no effort to promote universality and full implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention among the international community. 
Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
11 

SECRETARIA DE RELACIONES EXTERIORES 
MÉXICO 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATION OF MEXICO TO THE ORGANISATION FOR 
THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

XIII Conference of States Parties 
Statement by the Permanent Representative of Mexico 
Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco 

The Hague, December 2008 
SPEECH BY AMBASSADOR JORGE LOMÓNACO, PERMANENT 
REPRESENTATIVE OF MEXICO, AT THE XIII SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE 
OF STATES PARTIES OF THE ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

The Hague, December 2nd, 2008 

Mr. Chairman, 
I wish to express my sincere congratulations on your election as President of this Thirteenth Conference of States Parties and assure you, as other heads of delegations that have preceded me, both my full support and personal collaboration, and that of my delegation. I am sure that your experience and vision will lead us to a successful conclusion of this Conference. At the same time, I wish to take this opportunity to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Abuelgasim Abdelwahid Sheik Idris, Permanent Representative of the Republic of Sudan to the OPCW, for his effective conduction of the Twelve Conference of States Parties. 
Of course, I wish to reiterate Mexico’s recognition to the extraordinary work of our Director General, Amb. Rogelio Pfirter, at the helm of the OPCW. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Few months ago we engaged in an exhaustive and intensive journey of evaluation and prospective of the Chemical Weapons Convention, and of its implementation arm, the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. As we appreciate today, the Second Review Conference initiated an exercise of reflection in which we are all still immerse, although the implementation of its decisions has already started. It did not result, therefore, in a conclusive, finite exercise; rather, it is part of a continuous process looking ahead at the future. 
Indeed, the Second Review Conference sets the course and framework for the work of the OPCW for the next five years. However, we should not loose sight that, within this period, the total destruction of the chemical weapons arsenals worldwide must be completed; an accomplishment that would become a milestone for the OPCW’s history in particular, and for a world free of chemical weapons in general. As long as their existence represents a risk for world’s security and peace, the total and complete destruction of chemical weapons should no be perceived as a mean, but an end in itself, the fundamental reason for the Convention. 
In this context, I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate A State Party for the conclusion of the total destruction of its chemical stockpiles last July, becoming the second success story since the Convention entered into force. Furthermore, I wish to reiterate our call to possessor States Parties to continue, if not accelerate, their efforts to complete the destruction of their arsenals within the established deadlines. This would become an incentive for States Parties that do not possess chemical weapons to increase their efforts in implementing their own obligations. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Insiders and outsiders acknowledge OPCW’s success. Success which stems from its efficacy and efficiency but, above all, from the fact that States Parties do not have major differences on the fundamentals. This does not happen frequently in the multilateral arena, even less so in the disarmament and non proliferation field. 
Therefore, it is ironic that quite frequently we embark on what appear to be endless discussions about emphasis or inflexions. Discussions that, more often than should be desirable, distract us from attaining the core objectives, the ones which make the difference and on which we are all, essentially, in agreement. 

Mr. Chairman, 
As we all are aware, the international economic environment of today is very different from the one prevailing during the last Conference. The effects of the financial crisis have begun to be felt on the budgetary debates of the governments worldwide and, consequently, of the multilateral organizations to which we contribute as States Parties. Because of this, the budgetary discipline of the OPCW and its current proposal of zero-growth budget are a breath of fresh air. 
Notwithstanding the above, it has taken us more than five moths of negotiations to reach an agreement on the OCPW’s program and budget for 2009. We have gone through difficult and tense moments but we are sure that, in the end, the OPCW’s spirit will prevail. We wish to acknowledge those delegations that have yielded in their positions so the Organization at large can benefit. However, we were not able to avoid negotiations on the margins of the Conference. They will divert the attention from substantive issues and will decrease the quality of our deliberations. That’s not good news for such a successful organization. 
The reasons behind the disagreement merit a brief reflection. The center of the difference is a small proportion of the total budget and, in this delegation’s opinion, a relative minor issue in the context of the big themes of the OPCW. I must be clear: Mexico respects the positions of those delegations to which an increase in inspections to Other Chemical Plants Facilities is cause of concern or genuine interest, but at the same time we take note that symbolic considerations, pride or mere tactics, have played a role too. 
Either way, we recognize the link between the negotiations about the number of inspections and issues like the need to improve the verification regime, including site­selection methodology and enhancement of declarations. In other words, the role on non proliferation that the OPCW will play in the future and, in particular, once the complete and total destruction of the chemical weapons is concluded. In this regard, Mexico will continue to do its best so as to prevent polarization in the deliberations of the core issues of the OPCW and avoid repeating situations similar to what we are going thorough. 
In this context, my delegation wishes to reiterate its disposition and will to solve the pending issues of this Conference. We trust we will reach a compromise that will allow our organization to continue to working properly and satisfactorily. To that goal, Mexico will keep actively participating, and in a constructive manner, to bring positions closer on the proposal to increase inspections of OCPFs in order to achieve consensus and approve the budget before this Conference concludes. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Allow me to take a step back and return briefly to long term issues. Although the emphasis on what is “essential” in the Convention varies according to the interests and visions of each delegation, as it was demonstrated during the Second Review Conference, Mexico is convinced that all and each of us must comply with our obligations without conditions and, at the same time, respect and exercise the rights the Conference sets to each State Party. 
The Convention is one and its different parts are interrelated. The fulfillment or not of one of its parts could affect the purposes of the Convention as a whole. Therefore, we can not condition the implementation of obligations in order to enjoy the benefits; this is a two way road and a conditional approach could easily backlash at any moment and eliminate the incentives to comply with the obligations. 
To put it plainly, we can not put the implementation of Article VII obligations as a precondition to accede to international cooperation. It is necessary to keep the balance enshrined in the Convention: implementation of national obligations and international cooperation are complementary elements of the same equation,, designed not to exert pressure, but to generate incentives for developing nations, especially those which do not have chemical industry, let alone chemical weapons. 
In this context, Mexico will continue supporting activities that will lead to the full implementation of Article XI as a way to consolidate mutual trust and to contribute to the economic and technological development of the less developed nations. In this context, we welcome the proposal to organize a workshop that will allow for the identification of specific actions. However, we consider that we should not get lost in the discussion of what we should be discussing; that is: we must agree on concrete measures in an agreed framework without going in circles and without further delay. Let us double our efforts in that direction. 

Mr. Chairman, 
It is evident that we are going to face many and important challenges in the next five years. To adequately face them we need less polarization and harmony in details similar to what we have on fundamentals. The agenda for this Conference is also considerable. Let me reiterate that my delegation will participate constructively in the works of this Conference to achieve an effective completion of the agenda and thus contribute to the fulfillment of the objectives of the Convention. 
Thank you very much. 
THE 13TH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR DR FAUZIAH MOHAMAD TAIB, 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MALAYSIA TO THE 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS, 
THE HAGUE, 3 DECEMBER 2008 

Mr Chairman, 
May I say, on behalf of the delegation of Malaysia, how pleased we are to see you in the Chair of this 13th Session of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. The number ‘13’ to many is a prominent number, with all its implicit connotations, but I have no doubt that with you at this Conference’s helm, we will see a successful conclusion at the week’s end. My congratulations are also extended to the members of the 13th Bureau, whose appointments we recently endorsed. 
2. 
In the same vein, allow me to express my delegation’s gratitude to the outgoing Chairman, His Excellency Ambassador Abuelgasim Abdelwahid Sheikh Idris of Sudan for his outstanding stewardship of the 12th Session of the Conference of States Parties. 

3. 
Malaysia would also like to express its appreciation for Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter’s clear and comprehensive presentation of the work of the OPCW thus far. We trust that his statement and the reports that we have before us will provide a sound basis for the deliberations of the next few days.  

4. 
My delegation wishes to associate itself with the Joint Statement of the NAM CWC States Parties and China which was delivered by His Excellency Mr Oscar de los Reyes Ramos of Cuba. 


Mr Chairman, 
5. 
From 7 to 18 April of this year, the OPCW held its Second Review Conference. This was a distinctive opportunity for States Parties to review once more the operation of the CWC.  Malaysia is happy to note that the principle of consensus still remains the bedrock of the proceedings within the OPCW.  As we all know, consensus-building is probably the hardest of all negotiations approach. Voting is by far the easiest way out. No one has to move or to seek a compromise. But with a consensus, everyone compromises. What is even more notable about the Second Review Conference of the OPCW is perhaps its success. While a number of the other Review Conferences in the area of disarmament remain deadlocked and stagnant, it is heartening to see that the OPCW remains vibrant and strong in its push forward. A total of 33 countries have joined the OPCW since the First Review Conference five years ago – bringing the OPCW closest to any other Convention in terms of universal participation.  

6. 
One of my favourite comediennes once quipped, “Eighty percent of success is in showing up”. If this is so, then the Second Review Conference only saw an increase of one additional state party as a participant to the Conference, compared to the First Review Conference’s 113 State Parties. But I believe that success 

also lies in the active participation of all members to the Conference. And in this, the Second Review Conference delivered, especially with the active debates on the verification system, the importance of implementing legislation, and confidence-building and cooperation among State Parties, to name but a few. In the space of five short years, fast-paced innovations in the field of science and technology have had an impact on the operation of the Convention itself, making the convening of the Review Conference this year even more relevant. 

7. 
Malaysia remains concerned over the slow pace of the complete destruction of chemical weapons and chemical weapons facilities. We stress that the destruction of chemical weapons and associated facilities is the central objective of the CWC. In this regard, the compliance with the deadlines as set forth in the Convention constitutes an integral part of the undertakings by the Chemical Weapons Possessor States to destroy their chemical weapons. Merely paying lip-service to an obligation which is mandatory under international law does not bode well for the system as a whole, and creates distrust in addition to disrespect for the sanctity of international law. 

8. 
Malaysia welcomes the new establishment or designation of the National Authority for four additional States Parties, namely Afghanistan, Cambodia, the Central African Republic and Guinea-Bissau. This is an encouraging development given the Plan of Action on the implementation of Article VII obligation as well as the decision of the 10th CSP. It is well worth pointing out however that as of 15 


September 2008, the number of States Parties that have yet to establish or designate their National Authority remains at seven. This is still an acceptable single-digit number, given the progress we have achieved over the years. But the journey is far from over. This is why Malaysia is convinced that it is even more imperative that the Technical Secretariat and other States Parties provide meaningful assistance and technical support. Only through close cooperation with each other can the objectives of the Plan of Action on implementation of Article VII be effectively realised. 
Mr Chairman, 
9. 
Malaysia ratified the Convention in April 2000. Since then, we have upheld our obligation under the Convention by continuously submitting our annual declaration of past and anticipated activities associated with scheduled chemicals and discrete organic chemicals within our possession. To date, Malaysia has received three international inspections on its OCPFs in 2007, and one inspection recently this year. The inspections proceeded smoothly with the full cooperation of the Malaysian National Authority and were successfully completed.   

10. 
Malaysia acknowledges that the frequency of inspections and the OCPF site selection methodology are important but complex subjects. On these subjects, my delegation underlines that the Convention clearly sets out the hierarchy of risks posed by different chemicals to its object and purpose. While we have not found the selection methodology agreed by all, my delegation is hopeful that 

with the able leadership of the recently appointed facilitators, we would be able to come out with a new improved methodology.  

11. 
With regard to Article XI, Malaysia attaches great importance to a balanced implementation of all aspects of the Convention. In this respect, we believe that the full effective and non-discriminatory implementation of this Article is essential for the realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention. We therefore look forward to a full cooperation of all States Parties in achieving the full implementation of this Article. 


Mr Chairman, 
12. 
The transfer of scheduled chemicals between States Parties – if not properly monitored – can lead to the diversion of these toxic chemicals for non-peaceful purposes. With this in mind, the Royal Malaysian Customs Training Academy (AKMAL) played host to the Subregional Training Course for Customs Authorities in Southeast Asia on the Technical Aspects of the Transfers’ Regime of the CWC. The course, which was conducted by the OPCW took place in Melaka, from 6 to 9 October 2008. Twenty-two participants from eight States Parties, namely, Cambodia, Indonesia, Malaysia, Palau, Philippines, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam attended the training course. In the spirit of cooperation and camaraderie, two participants from Myanmar, a State not Party to the CWC also took part in the training course. Funding in this instance was provided by the Republic of Korea. 

13. 
During the training course, the participants received important information on practical ways in implementing the Convention’s provisions, with the aim of eliminating discrepancies between the quantities of scheduled chemicals declared by importing and exporting States Parties in respect of the same transfers. Practical exercises and group discussions designed to enhance the States Parties’ capacity to effectively track the import and export of scheduled chemicals were also held. Due to the overwhelming requests, Malaysia would like to once again offer its Royal Malaysian Customs Academy for training or courses related to the technical aspects of Customs. 

14. 
On a positive note and part of Malaysia’s own national initiative, Malaysia has drafted a manual of inspections for use at the national level. The manual sets out guidelines to be followed by the domestic inspectors when doing routine inspections at chemical-based local industries. In this way, things will be in order when the OPCW inspectors come a-calling. 

15. 
As a State Party to the Convention, Malaysia has benefited from the international cooperation programmes organised by the OPCW which focus on capacity building.  Malaysia has particularly benefited from the Internship Support Programmes as well the OPCW Associate Programmes, and the Laboratory Assistance Exchange Programme. In July, the Technical Secretariat conducted an Advanced Training on Inspections related to the CWC for Malaysia’s National Inspectors in Terengganu, on the east coast of Malaysia. We look forward to more constructive cooperation with the 


Technical Secretariat in enhancing Malaysia’s national capacity to meet its obligations under the Convention. 
Mr Chairman, 
16. This is the second decade in OPCW’s young history. As States Parties, we need to keep the momentum of the first decade going – in terms of the universality of the Convention, and in terms of the relevance of the treaty. But all this requires a lot of effort and firm commitment from States Parties. Malaysia, on its part, reiterates its commitment to the goals of the Convention. We are determined to work with other States Parties and the policy making organs of the OPCW for the full realisation of the Convention as a whole.  
Thank you. 
STATEMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES 
13th Session of the Conference of States Parties (CSP-13) 

By H.E. Ambassador Romeo A. Arguelles 
Permanent Representative of the Republic of the Philippines to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons The Hague, 3 December 2008 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
FIRST AND FOREMOST, CONGRATULATIONS AMBASSADOR SHIBUYA, ON HIS ELECTION AS THE CHAIRPERSON OF THIS YEAR’S SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES. AMBASSADOR SHIBUYA’S DIPLOMATIC SKILLS AND LONG YEARS OF EXPERIENCE WILL ASSURE US OF A SUCCESSFUL MEETING. I WISH TO ASSURE THE CHAIR OF THE FULL COOPERATION OF MY DELEGATION IN REACHING A SUCCESSFUL OUTCOME OF THIS CONFERENCE. 
MY DELEGATION’S CONGRATULATIONS ALSO GO TO AMBASSADOR ABUELGASIM ABDELWAHID SHIEKH IDRIS OF SUDAN FOR HIS EXCELLENT AND VERY ABLE CHAIRMANSHIP OF THE TWELFTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES. 
I WOULD ALSO LIKE TO EXTEND MY DEEPEST APPRECIATION AND CONGRATULATIONS TO AMBASSADOR OKSANA TOMOVA, PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF SLOVAKIA TO THE OPCW, AND CHAIPERSON OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, FOR HER DEDICATED WORK IN GUIDING US THROUGH IMPORTANT CORE ISSUES OF THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION. 
AS THE FORMER CHAIRPERSON OF THE EXECUTIVE COUNCIL, I UNDERSTAND THE RIGORS THAT AMBASSADOR TOMOVA MAY HAVE GONE THROUGH AND I TRULY COMMEND HER FOR HER VERY ABLE LEADERSHIP. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
MY DELEGATION LAUDS THE CONTINUOUS HARD WORK OF THE DIRECTOR GENERAL, AMBASSADOR ROGELIO PFIRTER, FOR ENSURING THE EFFECTIVE IMPLEMENTATION OF, AND UNIVERSAL ADHERENCE TO, THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION. 
MY DELEGATION ALSO WISHES TO EXPRESS OUR APPRECIATION FOR HIS INCESSANT EFFORTS TO PROMOTE THE WORK OF THE OPCW AND CWC IN VARIOUS REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL FORA. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
MY DELEGATION IS ATTENDING THIS CONFERENCE WITH A RENEWED ENTHUSIASM IN ENGAGING THE OPCW IN OUR NATIONAL IMPLEMENTATION EFFORTS. 
I AM PLEASED TO INFORM THAT WITH ME, AS PART OF THE PHILIPPINE DELEGATION, ARE HIGH-LEVEL OFFICIALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES (DENR). THE DENR IS THE INCOMING CWC NATIONAL AUTHORITY OF THE PHILIPPINES. IT IS TO BE NOTED THAT THE DEPARTMENT OF FOREIGN AFFAIRS HAS, TO DATE, SERVED AS THE PHILIPPINE CWC NATIONAL AUTHORITY, IN AN AD HOC CAPACITY. 
IT IS ENVISIONED THAT RIGHT AFTER THIS CONFERENCE, THE NECESSARY STEPS TO FORMALLY TURN OVER THE CWC-NA TO THE DENR WILL IMMEDIATELY COMMENCE. 
IT MAY BE RECALLED THAT OUR DRAFT NATIONAL CWC IMPLEMENTING LEGISLATION WAS SUBMITTED TO THE PHILIPPINE CONGRESS TWO YEARS AGO, WHILE WE HAVE TAKEN NOTE OF THE CONCERN THAT SOME COUNTRIES, INCLUDING OURS, HAVE YET TO ENACT AN IMPLEMENTING LEGISLATION, ALLOW ME TO ASSURE YOU THAT THE COMMITMENT OF THE PHILIPPINES REMAINS STEADFAST. 
THE PHILIPPINES WILL SOON RE-VISIT ITS DRAFT NATIONAL LEGISLATION WITH THE AIM OF REFINING IT AND SECURING ITS PASSAGE IN CONGRESS. IN THESE RENEWED EFFORTS, WE MAY SEEK THE ASSISTANCE OF AMBASSADOR SANTIAGO OÑATE LABORDE, THE OPCW LEGAL ADVISER, AND HIS TEAM, NOT ONLY IN FINALIZING THE TEXT OF OUR DRAFT LEGISLATION BUT ALSO IN BRIEFING OUR LAWMAKERS. WE WILL FURTHER COORDINATE WITH THE OPCW IN THIS REGARD. 
WE ALSO TAKE NOTE OF THE EU REPRESENTATION ON THIS MATTER. WE APPRECIATE THE OFFER OF ASSISTANCE OF THE EU AND WILL BEAR IT IN OUR MINDS AS WE IDENTIFY OUR SPECIFIC AREAS OF NEED. 
AT THIS JUNCTURE, ALLOW ME TO RECALL, WITH GRATITUDE, THE ASSISTANCE OF THE GOVERNMENTS OF AUSTRALIA AND JAPAN IN AN INDUSTRY-OUTREACH SEMINAR HELD IN MANILA LAST YEAR. IT WAS A WELL-ATTENDED SEMINAR, WITH THE PHILIPPINE CHEMICAL INDUSTRY PLAYERS WELL REPRESENTED. MANY OF OUR CURRENT EFFORTS STEM FROM THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THIS SEMINAR. 
MY DELEGATION ALSO WISHES TO COMMEND THE GOVERNMENT OF BANGLADESH FOR ITS HOSTING OF THE SIXTH ASIAN NATIONAL AUTHORITY MEETING ON 4-6 NOVEMBER. SUCH REGIONAL MEETINGS HAVE ALWAYS PROVEN EFFECTIVE IN FURTHER ENLIGHTENING RELEVANT OFFICIALS OF OUR COUNTRY AND THE REGION WE ARE IN ON THE STIPULATIONS AND IMPORTANCE OF THE CWC. 
FURTHER, MY DELEGATION IS OPTIMISTIC THAT OUR MEETING, WITHIN THIS WEEK, WITH AMBASSADOR KALIMI MUGAMBI MWORIA, DIRECTOR FOR INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION AND ASSISTANCE BRANCH, WILL AID US IN MUTUALLY IDENTIFYING AREAS OF COOPERATION, SUITABLE FOR THE PHILIPPINES. 
INDEED, WE HOPE TO COME BACK TO THIS SAME FORUM NEXT YEAR WITH SUBSTANTIAL DEVELOPMENTS TO REPORT. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
THE PHILIPPINES CALLS FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF ALL CHEMICAL WEAPONS BY POSSESSOR STATES PARTIES AND REITERATE THE IMPORTANCE OF THE TOTAL ELIMINATION OF ALL TYPES OF WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION, IN LINE WITH THE FIRST PREAMBULAR PARAGRAPH OF THE CONVENTION. 
MY DELEGATION JOINS IN THE EXPRESSION OF CONCERN THAT MAJOR POSSESSORS ARE FALLING BEHIND THEIR DESTRUCTION DEADLINES, WHILE WE DO NOT DOUBT THE COMMITMENT OF ANY CWC STATE PARTY, WE URGE POSSESSOR STATES TO ADHERE TO THE DEADLINE SET FOR THE DESTRUCTION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
MY DELEGATION WISHES TO EXPRESS ITS SATISFACTION THAT 184 NATIONS, OR 98% OF THE GLOBAL POPULATION, HAVE NOW JOINED THE OPCW. 
THIS DELEGATION WOULD LIKE TO EXTEND ITS CONGRATULATIONS AND WARM WELCOME TO THE STATES OF THE REPUBLIC OF THE CONGO AND THE REPUBLIC OF GUINEA-BISSAU FOR ACCEDING TO THE CONVENTION THIS YEAR. 
THIS DELEGATION ALSO CONGRATULATES LEBANON BY DEPOSITING ITS INSTRUMENT OF ACCESSION TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION (CWC) THIS YEAR. 
THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE CONVENTION IS FUNDAMENTAL TO THE ACHIEVEMENT OF THE OBJECT AND PURPOSE OF THE CONVENTION AND THE ENHANCEMENT OF INTERNATIONAL PEACE AND SECURITY. 
IN THIS REGARD, MY DELEGATION CONGRATULATES THE TECHNICAL SECRETARIAT FOR ITS CONTINUING EFFORTS TO ACHIEVE THE UNIVERSALITY OF THE CONVENTION AND WE URGE IT TO CONTINUE ITS EFFORTS TOWARDS THIS END. 
MR. CHAIRMAN, 
BEFORE I CONCLUDE, ALLOW ME TO RECALL THE ACHIEVEMENTS OF THE SECOND REVIEW CONFERENCE WHILE ALSO RECALLING A PROCEDURAL CONCERN THAT THE PHILIPPINES RAISED IN ITS STATEMENT DURING THE REVIEW CONFERENCE (REFERENCE: RC-2/NAT.21 DATED 18 APRIL 2008). 
THIS DELEGATION ADHERES TO THE BASIC UNIVERSALLY-ACCEPTED PRINCIPLE THAT MEETINGS, CONFERENCES, OR NEGOTIATIONS AMONG STATES PARTIES SHOULD REMAIN “OPEN, TRANSPARENT AND INCLUSIVE.” 
WE SHALL WORK TOWARDS THE SUCCESS OF THIS CONFERENCE, GUIDED BY THOSE BASIC WORKING PRINCIPLES AND WE CALL ON THIS CONFERENCE TO ADHERE TO THESE PRINCIPLES IN THE DELIBERATION OF ITS AGENDA. 
FINALLY, MR. CHAIRMAN, 
BE ASSURED THAT YOU HAVE MY DELEGATION’S AND MY COUNTRY’S SUPPORT. TOGETHER, WE WILL WORK TOWARDS A SUCCESSFUL CSP-13. 
THANK YOU VERY MUCH. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of the 13th Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). Please be assured of the full cooperation of my delegation for a successful outcome of the Conference. 
I also wish to express my delegation’s appreciation to Ambassador Abuelgasim Abdelwahid Shiekh Idris of Sudan for the efficient and competent manner in which he presided over the last session of the Conference. 
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered read by the Permanent Representative of Cuba Ambassador Oscar de los Reyes Ramos on behalf of the Members of the Non-aligned Movement and China. 
The Second Review Conference meeting in April this year has described the CWC as setting ‘new standards for global disarmament and non-proliferation through verification in a non-discriminatory and multilateral manner’. This statement affirms the unique character of the CWC as a disarmament instrument that is based on principles of non-discrimination. It also clearly underscores the legitimacy of non­proliferation under conditions free from selectivity or double standards. 
Verification is a sine qua non for the success of disarmament and non-proliferation. Without verification, disarmament and non-proliferation initiatives offer few benefits.    
The final deadline for the complete destruction of chemical weapons expires in just over three years from now. Yet more than half the total stockpile remains in tact. Any failure to meet the final deadline in April 2012 will deal a moral blow to the Convention. It will promote an impression that the CWC too suffers from different standards regarding compliance with solemn obligations. Clearly more should have been done to prevent the situation that presently confronts the OPCW. 
We urge the possessor states to redouble their efforts to comply with their obligations in order to prevent erosion in the moral authority of the Convention. Tangible progress also needs to be made in destroying abandoned chemical weapons. 
We express our satisfaction that a second State Party has completed its destruction programme this year.  
Mr.Chairman,  
The fundamental legal and political equity inherent in the Convention and the organisational support provided by the OPCW Secretariat have played a major role in the unprecedented growth in CWC’s membership.  We welcome Congo, Guinea Bissau as States Parties to the Convention and also appreciate the decision by Lebanon to join the Convention. 
The CWC’s appeal lies in the undeniable benefits it can bring both from a security perspective, regional and global, as well as its under-utilised potential to bring economic and technological benefits to the developing countries which constitute a majority of OPCW’s membership. 
We believe that attaining the universality of the Convention is, therefore, an important objective. It will strengthen security in regions where universality has remained elusive.  
We also need to pay greater attention to the unfinished business relating to progress in the implementation of Article XI on economic and technological development. At the time  the Convention was adopted in the Conference on Disarmament, undertakings were offered with evident sincerity for the removal of cartel­based restrictions in the field of trade in chemicals, equipment and related technologies for peaceful purposes.  
No progress has been made in this area despite the passage of 11 years since the Convention entered into force. Surely this matter must be counted as one of the key challenges the Organisation will have to deal with for its long term viability and confidence. 
Pakistan supports the proposal for a workshop dedicated to the implementation of Article XI.  We believe that this event can generate fresh thinking and new ideas on how best to realize the aims of this article while taking into account the current international conditions. Such deliberations could also lead to the adoption of an Action Plan along the lines of successful plans in the area of universality and national implementation. 
Progress on the key goals of Article XI must be separated from the distinct area of national implementation where international cooperation has indeed proved to be fruitful. 
Pakistan welcomes the progress made by States Parties in the implementation of their Article VII obligations.  
We take our obligations for national implementation seriously and have invested considerable resources in creating an effective National Authority, establishing legislation covering not just the CWC but other weapons of mass destruction, setting-up of an Export Control Authority and a communications network called the Wide Area Network that facilitates CWC implementation. 
We are prepared to share our experience in setting up this network both with the Secretariat as well as interested States Parties. Pakistan is also prepared to host a workshop on Advanced Training for National Authorities in 2010. We have also initiated consultations for the holding of a South Asian sub-regional workshop for sharing of CWC implementation experiences between countries in the region. 
At the OPCW we will continue to support programmes that help other States Parties in making progress on their Article VII requirements. A cooperative approach has proven to be the best option and should be maintained.  
Similarly, in the context of Article X on Assistance and Protection, we welcome the substantive contribution that the OPCW has made as reflected in the Report on Article X by the Director-General. However, there is scope for additional efforts by the Technical Secretariat and States Parties in order to achieve and maintain a high level of readiness of the OPCW.  
We also hope that the next major exercise on assistance and protection will be more inclusive than has been the case with the past exercises that benefited a limited number of countries. 
Mr Chairman, 
This Conference is required to approve the Programme and Budget for the OPCW for 2009. We commend the Secretariat for a generally balanced, zero-nominal growth draft budget. 
With regard to the proposal for increases in OCPF inspections that has proved to be contentious, we reiterate our position that prior understandings in dedicated consultations should be reached before such proposals are reflected in the budget. Otherwise budgetary negotiations will become increasingly difficult to conclude as is the case this year.  
We also believe that a report by the Secretariat on improvements that have come about as a result of the application of the modified site selection methodology for OCPFs can provide valuable inputs to the future consideration of optimum levels of inspections in this category of chemical plants, keeping in view the hierarchy of risks associated with different categories of facilities. 
Mr. Chairman, 
It is entirely legitimate to anticipate the challenges that the Convention will face in the future on account of fast-paced developments in the chemical industry as well as science and technology. But this must be done in a balanced manner. At the Second Review Conference my delegation had stated that historically the influence of advanced military technologies has often led to a search for exploiting real or perceived loopholes in legal instruments in order to circumvent their prohibitions and that it would be unfortunate if the CWC were to be subjected to similar treatment. Unfortunately the important question of incapacitating agents was suppressed during the Second Review Conference and we feel that with inordinate focus on such issues as OCPF inspections some of the very real challenges to the Convention might get sidelined.  
It is our hope that all pertinent issues will be fully discussed and debated under the mechanisms identified by the Second Review Conference for creating greater coherence between the Scientific Advisory Board and the policy organs of the OPCW. 
On its part, Pakistan remains fully committed to the success of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the work of the OPCW. 
Thank you Mr. Chairman. 
THIRTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION The Hague, 2-5 December 2008 
Check against delivery 
STATEMENT 
by Ambassador Bratislav Djordjevic, 
Head of the National Authority of the Republic of Serbia  
for the Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, 
made in the general debate on 2 December 2008 

Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Director-General, 
Excellencies, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 

On behalf of the delegation of Serbia, I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Chairman, and the 
other members of the Bureau, on your unanimous election to these high offices and the 
assumption of your duties. Let me assure you of my delegation’s full cooperation and support. 

We thank the Director-General for a comprehensive report on the implementation of the 
Chemical Weapons Convention and for his introductory statement that will greatly facilitate 
our deliberations at the Conference. The Technical Secretariat under his able guidance 
continues to be an effective force without the contribution of which, the implementation of the 
Convention would not be possible. 

We appreciate very much the hard work of the Executive Council and its Chairperson, 
Ambassador Tomova of Slovakia, as well as the invaluable contribution of the Scientific 
Advisory Board. 

We also join the other delegations in welcoming Lebanon’s recent accession to the 
Convention. 

Mr. Chairman, 

We are meeting for the second time this year as the Conference of the States Parties to address 
the issues of importance to the Convention. The Second Review Conference, held in April 
this year, has enabled us to review the Convention’s implementation in the past five years and 
to set the goals for our work in the future. This important event, together with the activities 
undertaken last year in connection with the observance of the tenth anniversary of the 
Convention, has created a momentum conducive to mobilizing and streamlining our efforts to 

shape up the Organisation in order to effectively respond to the challenges that lie ahead. This is why we consider that the momentum should be maintained and even enhanced further, so that this session proves once again the sustained commitment of the States Parties to effective multilateralism. 
Chemical demilitarization and verification certainly deserve our utmost attention. While we praise the significant progress achieved so far, and the fact that two States Parties have completed the destruction of their respective stockpiles of chemical weapons, we must maintain the course that should ultimately lead  to the complete success – the  total elimination of chemical weapons within the final extended deadlines. In this connection, we welcome the useful practice of the Executive Council’s visits to the possessor States. 
Although the Organisation has almost attained its universality, it is evident that certain “grey areas” still exist and that the final goal for the time being remains elusive. It is necessary to redouble our efforts at all levels to bring on board the States that are outside of the Convention. The sooner, the better, for if we want to be effective, there should be no exceptions. 
This should enable the Organisation and its Member States to turn their full attention, in the years to come, to issues of non-proliferation, chemical transfers regime, international cooperation and assistance, thus enabling the Organization to reach every part of the world, ensuring both the full respect for the Convention’s provisions and the benefits of the chemical industry in accordance with the Convention. Simultaneously, the Organisation must be prepared to render its important contribution to an effective and coordinated response to the new challenges to international security, posed primarily by terrorism.  
If we are to be successful and future-oriented, a prominent place should be given to the implementation of the Convention’s provisions nationally. In this regard, cooperation, assistance and protection against chemical weapons, accompanied by an appropriate allocation of funds, including voluntary contributions, should become even more relevant. In addition to a multilateral approach, Member States should focus on making full use of regional and sub-regional capacities and expertise, including the full use of training centres for that purpose. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Distinguished representatives, 

My country has been making constant efforts to increase cooperation with the OPCW and its Member States, especially in the field of cooperation and assistance. On this occasion, I am pleased to inform you of some important developments and activities that have taken place in Serbia this year in cooperation with the OPCW. 
First, the National Authority of Serbia hosted the Seventh Regional Meeting of National Authorities of States Parties in Eastern Europe (Belgrade, 3-5 June 2008). The meeting, in which 24 Member States participated, was devoted to the exchange of views among the representatives of National Authorities of Eastern Europe on major issues regarding the implementation of the Convention. National Authority representatives considered issues arising from the practical implementation of the Convention relating to the transfers provisions of the Convention, as well as the role of National Authorities in relation to Customs Authorities. That was an action-oriented meeting, combining both exchanges of views and presentations as well as visits of a practical nature. The participants visited the Training Centre and Trayal Corporation in Kruševac, and the National Poison Control Centre in Belgrade, where they were given extensive briefings on the activities of these institutions.  
Second, the Fourth international basic course on assistance and protection was held at our Training Centre in Kruševac, from 2-6 June 2008. The course, in which 19 participants from 17 Member States took part, was intended to strengthen national capacities under Article X of the Convention. 
Third, the national seminar for customs officials was held in Belgrade on 6 June 2008, in which 60 customs officials from Serbia participated.  
We are pleased to note that the participants of both the regional meting and the basic course benefited from the respective addresses  made by the OPCW Director-General, who paid a visit to Serbia on that occasion 
I should like to extend my Government’s appreciation to all National Authorities and representatives who, by their active participation, contributed to the success of all these events. We appreciate very much the visit of the Director-General to Serbia and his readiness to take an active part in these events, since we are convinced that this is the best way to advance the cause of the Convention and the OPCW. We are also very grateful to the OPCW Technical Secretariat for co-sponsoring the events. 
In addition, the useful cooperation with the OPCW Inspectorate Division has continued by organising another round of clinical placement of OPCW medical personnel at the National Poison Control Centre in Belgrade and by hosting the training of OPCW inspectors. 
Finally, let me give you a brief update on the national implementation efforts: It is expected that two new draft laws will be adopted by the end of this year or early next year, i.e. the draft law on the implementation of the CWC and the draft law on foreign trade of arms, military equipment and dual-use goods.  The Agreement between Serbia and the OPCW on the privileges and immunities of the OPCW, which was signed on 7 March 2008, was sent to the Parliament with a view to its early ratification.   
In conclusion, Serbia stands ready to continue and enhance the already well-developed cooperation with the OPCW and its Member States. We will continue to contribute by organising various courses on assistance and protection, training courses for the OPCW inspectors as well as a clinical placement training of the OPCW medical personnel in our medical institutions.  We are certainly open to new forms of cooperation and look forward to developing multilateral, regional and bilateral cooperation. 
I thank you, Mr. Chairman 
Statement by Ambassador Selahattin Alpar Permanent Representative of the Republic of Turkey to the OPCW 
Delivered on 03.12.2008 
Thirteenth Conference of the State Parties to the  
Chemical Weapons Convention 

The Hague, 2-5 December 2008 



STATEMENT BY THE REPUBLIC OF TURKEY 
(The Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties, 2-5 December 2008,  The Hague) 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Distinguished Delegates, Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I feel privileged to represent Turkey at the Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties, with a view to reviewing the substantial progress achieved in the implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC). 
At the outset, I would like to extend my Delegation’s compliments to the Ambassador of, Japan, HE Minoru Shibuya for his election to the Chairmanship of the Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties. We are of the firm belief that Ambassador Shibuya’s well respected diplomatic skills as well as the experience and dedication of the Director General of the OPCW Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter will help to ensure the success of this conference. They will have the full cooperation and support of the Turkish Delegation.  
Our gratitude also goes to the Ambassador of Sudan, HE Abuelgasim Sheikh Idris who with great skills chaired the Twelfth Conference of the States Parties last year. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Turkey has aligned herself with the EU Statement read by the Ambassador of France, HE Jean-François Blarel. Nevertheless, I would like to touch upon several issues which are, I believe, important for this body and at the same time of special interest to my country.   
Mr. Chairman, 
I would like to start with the implementation of one of the core objectives of the CWC, namely the elimination of all chemical weapons and their production facilities with a view to achieving the ultimate goal of complete disarmament through strict and effective control of this process. In this connection, after Albania, “A State Party” deserves appreciation, as the second possessor State Party that completely eliminated its declared chemical weapons stockpile under the Chemical Weapons Convention. This is an important step towards reaching a chemical weapons free world. We believe that this achievement will contribute to the reduction of the threats to global security and promoting international peace. 
We are confident that other possessor States will also make every effort to meet their obligations stemming from the Convention to achieve complete and irreversible destruction of their chemical weapons within the deadlines set by the Convention. In any case, final deadlines set by the Convention in order to complete 
1 

the destruction of the chemical weapons should not be exceeded. During the destruction process we expect that environmental, safety and financial aspects will also be taken into consideration by the possessor States Parties. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Verification is another core objective of the Convention which provides for systematic on-site monitoring of the destruction of chemical weapons and production facilities. The verification regime also creates an opportunity to monitor the activities not prohibited under the Convention. Therefore, as we come closer to the deadline for the completion of the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles, inspection of other chemical production facilities (OCPF) deserves a closer attention. We believe that the number of OCPF inspections should further be increased and the declarations of OCPFs should be submitted accurately and updated in a timely manner, in order to improve the efficiency of the verification regime. In this context, implementation of Verification Information System will enhance accuracy and efficiency of the work related to verification issues. Furthermore, we recognize the need to keep verification regime up-to-date in accordance with the developments in science and technology. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Universality of the Convention remains to be one of the challenges that we still need to deal with. We are pleased to note that after accession of the Republic of Congo and Guinea-Bissau in 2008, States Parties to the Convention have increased to a total of 184.  
We should keep the momentum until all States become party to the Convention. In this connection, I would like to inform the Conference that Turkey will host the fourth regional workshop on the universality of the Convention in the Mediterranean Basin and in the Middle East Region, in Istanbul, on 16 and 17 April 2009. By taking this initiative, Turkey wishes to compliment efforts by the EU and the OPCW to promote the universality of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We believe this workshop will contribute to the universality of the Convention. 
Effective national implementation of the Article VII obligations is essential for the success of the Convention and plays an indispensable role for our common security. Turkey acknowledges the progress made on implementation of Article VII obligations, however it is obvious that there is much more work to be done and further efforts are required worldwide in this field.  
Mr. Chairman, 
Assistance and protection against chemical weapons continues to be an equally 
important topic.  It is crucial to give an effective and timely response in case of use 
of chemical weapons. We support ongoing endeavors to achieve this goal. 

2 

Turkey attaches great importance to Article XI of the Convention which is economic and technological development. International cooperation in this field avails States Parties to develop capacities required to implement the Convention and use of chemicals for peaceful purposes. In this context, we support the initiative to convene a workshop in 2009 on exploring concrete measures to improve the implementation of Article XI of the CWC.  
Yet, another important issue is industry cluster activities. We welcome the appointment of facilitators on the topics of “Enhancement of OCPF Declarations” and “Low Concentration of Schedule 2 (2A and 2A*) Chemicals” and initiation of consultations on these issues. We also expect that consultations on the other outstanding issues under the industry cluster will commence soon.  
It gives me pleasure that Turkey will also host a sub-regional seminar on chemical industry related issues for States Parties in the Mediterranean Basin in fall 2009, in Istanbul. We expect that this event will help better implementation of Article VI of the Convention.  
Mr. Chairman, 
I would like to touch particularly on terrorism which is a real threat especially to Turkey and many other States who have encountered terrorist attacks. The Convention has capability and tools to fight against chemical terrorism. In this context, we recall the decision of the Council (EC-XXVII/DEC.5, dated 7 December 2001) related to the OPCW’s contribution to global anti-terrorist efforts, which is still relevant today. This decision emphasizes that the full and effective implementation of all provisions of the Convention constitutes a contribution to global anti-terrorist efforts. The decision focuses on universality, national implementation, destruction of chemical weapons, activities not prohibited by the Convention, as well as assistance and protection.  
I also would like to emphasize the importance of the cooperation among the OPCW, States Parties and international organizations. We believe that the UN Security Council resolution 1540 and the UN “Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy”, re-adopted by the General Assembly on September 5th, 2008 will enhance national, regional and international efforts to counter terrorism. The strategy encourages the OPCW to continue its efforts, within its respective mandate, in helping States to build a capacity to prevent terrorists from accessing chemical materials, to ensure security at related facilities, and to respond effectively in case of an attack using such materials.  
Mr. Chairman, 
This year the Second Review Conference was held in April 2008 to review the operation of the Convention during the last five years. This meeting provided a 
3 

special opportunity to evaluate the implementation of the CWC in this period and determine the challenges to overcome in the following term. At the end of the Second Review Conference, the States Parties reaffirmed their firm commitments to reaching the goals and objectives of the CWC and adopted a report which sheds light on the needs of effective, robust and timely implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. 
The Second Review Conference gave us yet another possibility to emphasize and demonstrate the importance of the Convention and its contribution to promoting international peace and security. 
Mr. Chairman, 
My country is proud to fulfill its national implementation obligations as well as other obligations deriving from the Convention. Considering global arms control and disarmament as a major aspect of its foreign policy, my Government supports complete disarmament efforts worldwide. Turkey reaffirms its commitment to the goals of the Convention. In this vein, Turkey, in coordination with the Technical Secretariat, will do its utmost to the successful implementation of the universality workshop and industry seminar, as I mentioned before both will be held in Istanbul, in 2009. 
Mr. Chairman, 
Last but not least, I would like to extend my heartfelt gratitude to those who have invested their time and energy for creating a world, free of chemical weapons. In that respect, I wish to express my appreciation once again for the diligent work conducted by the Technical Secretariat under the able and wise supervision of the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter. 
Mr. Chairman, 
The Turkish Delegation looks forward to working with you and with the Secretariat constructively in the coming days and pledges its full support for the successful completion of the Conference. 
Thank you. 
4 

AS DELIVERED 

STATEMENT BY 



AMBASSADOR ERIC M. JAVITS 
UNITED STATES DELEGATION TO THE 
13TH CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

OF THE 

ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF 
CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

DECEMBER 2, 2008 
AS DELIVERED 

Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director-General, Distinguished Delegates,  
I am deeply honored to be here, once again, among so many friends and colleagues at the 13th Conference of the States Parties.  I warmly welcome our new Chairman, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan.  We are confident that he will guide us skillfully through our agenda this week and bring us to a successful conclusion.  I also extend my heartfelt appreciation to our past chairman, Ambassador Abuelgasim Idris, and thank him for his wisdom and exemplary service to this Organization.  As always, I pledge my own support and that of my delegation to making this a productive and successful session. 
The Conference of the States Parties provides an important opportunity every year to review from where we have come and to make decisions for the year ahead.  This year has been an especially meaningful one. The Second Review Conference in April marked a critical milestone in the work of the OPCW.  I feel privileged to have been able to participate in both the First and the Second Review Conferences during my nearly six years with this Organization. We all have much to be proud of in the achievements of the OPCW, but much work remains to be done.  I have great hopes for the continuing success of this Organization due to the earnest commitment of the member states, the deft guidance by the Chairpersons of the political bodies, the selfless work of our many facilitators, and the devoted and superior service rendered by our delegations and the Technical Secretariat.  Nor could our success have been achieved without the supremely capable leadership of the Director-General, who has served so brilliantly at the helm of this enterprise.        
As many of you will recall, the Second Review Conference was quite an ordeal for those of us who participated, with multiple papers and positions over many months, widely divergent views, and then a marathon of long days and a couple of all-night sessions.   What we produced in that two-week ordeal last April is a reaffirmation of the Chemical Weapons Convention, a strong renewal of the commitment by all States Parties to the goals and objectives of the Convention and to the implementation of all of its provisions.  We set out some guidelines for the future of this Organization, demonstrating that it is a living entity, continuing to work, adjusting to changing circumstances, and thriving.  Our agenda here this week in the annual Conference of the States Parties is a critical continuation of that process to make the vision of the Second Review Conference a reality. 
The Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons will not reach its conclusion when all the declared chemical weapons are finally destroyed, although that will be a remarkably historic event to celebrate. Any who hold the view that final destruction of declared stockpiles will signal the end of the Chemical Weapons Convention are sorely mistaken. The OPCW will continue to have a critical role long after disarmament, in assuring that chemical weapons will never again be developed, produced, or used.  
1 

AS DELIVERED 

This is a covenant of the Convention that the States Parties unanimously affirmed in the Report of the Second Review Conference as this Organization’s ongoing, ultimate, and permanent non-proliferation role.     
The Second Review Conference expressed concern over the increased danger of the use of chemical weapons by terrorists, and invited States Parties to consult and cooperate both bilaterally and regionally on ways to prevent terrorist use of such weapons. It also recalled the important work of the OPCW Open-ended Working Group on Terrorism and affirmed its continuing relevance.  My government strongly supports and encourages that Working Group and the OPCW to be used as a forum for discussion of issues by States Parties and others to share their experiences related to chemical safety and security and the potential threat of toxic chemicals being exploited by terrorists. 
The Second Review Conference reiterated that the universality of the Convention is essential to achieve its object and purpose. We have made enormous strides toward universal membership in the Chemical Weapons Convention since its Entry-Into-Force.  In just the six years since I have been here, we have added 32 States Parties, with only ten states now remaining to ratify or accede, an accomplishment in no small part due to the tireless efforts of our Director-General. We warmly welcome the ratification of the Convention by The Republic of the Congo, Guinea Bissau, and most recently Lebanon, since our last Conference.   We are very pleased that Iraq and the Bahamas are completing their internal procedures for accession and we look forward to both becoming States Parties to the Convention very soon.  This is a particularly significant turning point for Iraq and we are proud of the Iraqi government’s decision to join the Convention, and the international community, in our mutual efforts to destroy and prevent the use of all chemical weapons everywhere.    
It remains vitally important that the states remaining outside the Convention also accede so that the entire world can reap its benefits – a total ban on an entire class of weapons, the destruction of all existing chemical weapons, and the promotion of trade in chemicals and international cooperation in chemical activities not prohibited by the Convention. The essential goal of universality is within our grasp, but we must all continue to pursue the few states that have not yet joined the international community in ratifying this Convention. The United States, for its part, is doing what it can to work to with non-States Parties who are interested in joining the Convention. 
The Second Review Conference also reaffirmed that the full and effective national implementation of the obligations under the Convention is essential for its realization.  These obligations belong to each and every State Party in the Organization.  It is encouraging to note that nearly all States Parties have designated a National Authority.  We also note with appreciation that many countries are working on their implementing legislation, and we encourage their efforts in completing this obligation.  Despite this 
2 

AS DELIVERED 

progress, many States Parties still have not implemented domestic legislation covering all key areas of the Convention.  This is an area that will require more attention and cooperation among States Parties in order to address legal shortcomings.  As always, the Technical Secretariat and other States Parties, including the United States, stand ready to assist when needed. 
During the Second Review Conference, and in all of the meetings of the Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties, the complete destruction of chemical weapons and the conversion or destruction of Chemical Weapons Production Facilities have been stressed. Indeed, these are the central goals of the Convention.  Whether in declared storage stockpiles and destruction facilities, or in old and abandoned munitions, wherever they are found, chemical weapons are a bane that we are working collectively to eliminate. 
We are heartened that Albania and A State Party have completed destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles. This is a significant accomplishment and we gratefully offer our congratulations. It is also noteworthy that India is very near completing the destruction of its stockpile. Those of us who possess chemical weapons have special responsibilities to secure these weapons, to declare them, and to destroy them under international monitoring. Destruction by some possessor states, including the United States, has not been as rapid as any of us would wish, but it is relentlessly, relentlessly moving forward and gaining momentum. The inevitability of the scourge of chemical warfare being purged forever from our planet becomes more apparent with each and every weapon destroyed. 
 For our part, the United States, with the second-largest stockpile in the world, has destroyed over 56 percent of its chemical weapons and all of its binary chemical weapons – that is to say, all of the munitions, parts, components and chemicals associated with the most modern chemical weapons system ever developed by the United States. We have destroyed all of our former production facilities, completed operations at our Newport destruction facility, and have destroyed over 96 percent of our total stockpile of nerve agent. The United States understands our obligations under the Chemical Weapons Convention and we are fully committed to the complete destruction of our stockpiles as rapidly as possible.  We have worked hard to eliminate the weapons of greatest risk first, and now continue with all deliberate speed to destroy the remainder as quickly and safely as possible. 
The Executive Council’s visit to Russia’s Shchuchye facility in September provided an opportunity for representatives of the Council to observe the enormity and complexity of Russia’s ongoing destruction efforts.  This visit, like the earlier one to the Anniston facility in the United States, is an important part of the series of exchanges which contribute to confidence building, and which demonstrate the commitment of the United States and the Russian Federation to the complete destruction of their stockpiles.  We 
3 

AS DELIVERED 

have invited the Executive Council to send a delegation to Pueblo, Colorado, and Umatilla, Oregon, during the first week of June 2009 for the next in this series of visits.   
Mr. Chairman, 
We face a number of important issues this week, the most critical being adoption of the Program of Work and Budget for 2009. Intensive consultations have been continuing on the budget, and we urge our colleagues on the Executive Council to come to agreement as quickly as possible in recommending the budget to this Conference.  Due in part to the tough negotiations on this and other budget issues, I would like to offer my profound thanks to Martin Strub of Switzerland, who has patiently conducted consultations on the budget over the past several months. 
Our other dedicated and tireless facilitators have also been engaged in ongoing consultations on Article VII implementation, Article X assistance and protection, improving Article XI programs, and Universality.  We hope that as that work continues this week, we can achieve consensus on the decisions or report language relating to these important subjects during this Conference.  Discussion of some of the issues under the industry cluster recently took on new life with new facilitators beginning consultations on the enhancement of declarations for Other Chemical Production Facilities and low concentration limits for Schedule 2A/2A* chemicals.  I wish each and all of our facilitators success in their efforts to achieve consensus on these important issues. 
Mr. Chairman, 
As I plan my retirement and departure from The Hague, I beg your indulgence for a few final reflections on this remarkable institution of which we are all a part, the OPCW.   The First and Second Review Conferences were last minute high wire acts from which we were fortunate both times not to trip and fall to failure.  The next Review Conference and the final extended deadlines for destruction of chemical weapons will present exceedingly difficult issues for the future of this Organization. We need to move toward 
– and past -- 2012 and that next Review Conference with determination and the realization that there is much that all of us still have to do to ensure the continued success of the OPCW well into the future.  We have faced difficult challenges many times in the past. Yet we have successfully resolved so many contentious issues that I remain confident that this Organization can continue to do so in the future. 
All of us in the OPCW are multilateralists. Achieving excellence in the multilateral field is a shared enterprise in which each participant is indispensable.  The underlying factor for our success is the ethos of consensus – that mutual devotion and commitment to come to agreements that everyone can accept and support.  Consensus empowers all of us. Here everyone’s voice counts, and everyone is part of the group’s achievements. 
4 

AS DELIVERED 

If our political bodies, the Executive Council and the Conference of the States Parties, turn to voting to resolve issues – and that is always possible -- I fear that this Organization will devolve into the factionalism, acrimony, and bitterness that we have seen so often in other international bodies. 
I am grateful to all my past and present colleagues for consistently choosing the consensus path through all of the years that I have been here, although it has not always been easy. It has required long hours and myriad discussions to hear all parties with interests in the issue, and it has required the commitment and creativity of leaders, facilitators, and delegates alike to find the solutions.  The OPCW can reinforce that tradition and its strong record of achievement through the difficult challenges that lie ahead. My fervent hope is that all of you, and those that succeed you, will keep the flame alive and never waver in carrying on the exemplary tradition of hard work, consensus building, and success that has marked the OPCW as a unique and vital multilateral institution. 
I will repeat what I have stated many times in different forums – the OPCW is truly a model of effective multilateral diplomacy. 
I bid each of you a very, very fond farewell, with my thanks for the unflagging cooperation so generously extended to our delegation.  I will always treasure the professional and personal friendships made here at the OPCW that so have enriched my life. 
I would like to request that this statement be circulated as an official document of the 13th Session of the Conference of States Parties.  
I thank you from the bottom of my heart. 
5 


