14th Session 
of the Conference of States Parties 
to the Chemical Weapons Convention 

Universality of CWC 

Statement by Mr Lukasz Zielinski, 
Deputy Head of Delegation, 
Head of WMD Disarmament and Non-proliferation Section, 
Security Policy Department, 
Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Poland 

Mr Chairman, 
Since this is the first time that the Polish Delegation takes the floor at this 14th Session of the Conference let me welcome you warmly to the chair. We are certain that you will ably guide us throughout this important session. 
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, 
It is our honour and pleasure to inform you that the annual United Nations General Assembly Resolution on CWC Implementation has been adopted, without a vote, by the First Committee in New York. My delegation appreciates the recognition of the importance of the Resolution by the Director-General in his opening statement to the 14th Session of the Conference. 
The active and continued coordination of the work on the CWC Resolution is a concrete input Poland has made throughout many years to promote the effective prohibition of chemical weapons. Support for both full and effective implementation of all provisions of the Convention and its universality are core objectives of Poland’s efforts in support for the total prohibition of chemical weapons.  
The Resolution on the implementation of Chemical Weapons Convention is a unique document. It emphasises the importance of the universality of the Convention. It  provides United Nations support for all four pillars of the Convention. The first of these is the support for the irreversible destruction of all chemical weapons and their means of production. The second is non-proliferation, to ensure that new chemical weapons do not emerge. The third is assistance and protection for States Parties to defend themselves against the possible use of chemical weapons. And the fourth pillar is international cooperation to promote the peaceful uses of chemistry.  
By adopting the Resolution by consensus every year, the United Nations has expressed unequivocal support for the prohibition of chemical weapons and the work of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons. 
Mr Chairman, Distinguished Delegates, 
Polish Delegation has the pleasure to inform that on 16 October 2009 on the occasion of the meetings related to the Resolution on CWC Implementation the representatives of Poland and the OPCW Director-General conducted a series of individual meetings with representatives of States not Parties to the CWC. The purpose of the meetings, conducted also in 2008, was to contribute to the OPCW activities aimed at the promotion of full and universal membership to the Organisation and to reinforce contacts with the countries from outside of the OPCW. 
Egypt, Myanmar, Israel and Syria accepted invitations to meet with the delegation of Poland and the Director-General. 
The meetings were important CWC universality activities conducted by Poland along with the work on the draft UNGA Resolution on the Implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention. They raised the level of contacts with the States remaining outside the OPCW and allowed for a fruitful exchange of views. 
Poland will continue to organise such joint meetings with States not Parties to CWC during the sessions of the UNGA First Committee in coming years. 
Thank you very much for your attention. 
The Hague, 2 December 2009 
2 

Speech of H.E. Mr. Mizanur Rahman, Permanent Representative of Bangladesh to OPCW and Ambassador of Bangladesh to the Netherlands on 14th session of CSP 
Mr. Chairman, Director General OPCW, Excellencies, Ladies and Gentlemen good afternoon. It’s a great pleasure and honour for me to be able to address this gathering where all the peace-loving nations of the world express their commitment and conviction for a world free of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction, i.e., the Chemical Weapons. I would like to begin by congratulating you Mr. Chairman on your appointment as the Chairman of the 14the CSP. I would like to express my sincere thanks to Director General Rogelio Ffirter for his immense contribution to OPCW. I would also like to state my delegation’s support for the recommendation of the Executive Council for H.E. Mr. Ahmet Uzumcu of Turkey to be appointed as the next Director General of OPCW. I believe the convention will continue to make further progress under his leadership. 
2. 
Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the Government of The Peoples Republic of Bangladesh, let me express our whole-hearted appreciation and thanks to the OPCW Secretariat for hosting the 14th conference of the state parties and thereby creating an enormous opportunity for this international forum to interact and exchange views and experiences on the implementation of the convention. 

3. 
Bangladesh is a peace-loving nation and it is manifested in our constitutional commitment to the general and complete disarmament. Since its emergence as an independent nation in 1971, Bangladesh has always been a pioneer in the South Asian Region for the cause of global peace and disarmament. As a member of the Conference on Disarmament and a party to the Geneva Convention – 1925, Bangladesh became one of the early signatories and ratifying states of the CWC. Besides this pioneering effort, Bangladesh was also the first signatory to the Anti-Personnel Mine (APM) Ban Treaty and the first ratifying state to the Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) and Comprehensive Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) in South Asia. 

4. 
Mr. Chairman, at this point of my address, I would like to explain the stand of the Government of The Peoples Republic of Bangladesh about the CWC and its implementation. We 


1 

take pride in the fact that Bangladesh was never associated in the production, procurement, or use of Chemical or Biological Weapons and always condemned the use of such weapons of mass destruction against mankind. We fully support the OPCW’s efforts in making the Convention comprehensive, non-discriminatory, verifiable and ultimately a universal instrument for the elimination of Chemical Weapons from the world. Therefore, we urge upon all the states, which are yet to sign or ratify the CWC to come forward and embrace the noble objectives of the Convention.  
5. Mr. Chairman, I feel it relevant to say a few words about Bangladesh National Authority for CWC and the state of implementation of CWC in Bangladesh. We are fully aware of the obligations under the Convention and would like to mention here a few points: 
a. 	
Bangladesh signed the Chemical Weapons Convention on 14 January 1993 and ratified the same on 25 April 1997. Armed Forces Division is entrusted with the responsibilities of BNACWC. 

b. 	
There are total 18 members (including the Chairman and Member secretary from Armed Forces Division) in the BNACWC. Rest 16 members are selected from different ministries/ organisations. 

c. 	
We have already submitted necessary declaration regarding the Chemical Weapons and their production facilities. Initially we declared 6 fertilizers companies of Bangladesh. We are in a process to move our focus on pharmaceutical and insecticide factories.  

d. 	
As a State Party to the Convention Bangladesh has already enacted the Gazette on National Law for CWC. Enacting the Legislature was the first challenge of the entire project. Right now we are working on some of the important regulations related to the convention which are in the final stage of approval by the Government.  

e. 	
BNACWC has conducted total seven workshops on CWC in Bangladesh. These were held at national level in the year 1999, 2005, 2007(April) and 2008 (April, July and Nov) where total 185 participants from home and abroad took part. 

f. 	
On 29th April 2007, Bangladesh commemorated the Tenth anniversary of the Entry into Force of the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) and the founding of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons (OPCW). National Authority celebrated the 10th Anniversary of OPCW. We have arranged TV Talk show and published News paper supplements. 

g. 	
For the first time Bangladesh hosted the Sixth Regional Meeting of National Authorities of States Parties in Asia from 4 to 6 November 2008. Bangladesh became the first country in South Asia to host such a gathering. Total 43 participants from 22 States Parties attended the meeting.  

h. 	
Till now, Bangladesh received 02 sequential inspections from OPCW in April 2008 and February 2009 respectively.  


2 

6. It is worthy to mention here that Bangladesh is meeting all national obligations as a state party to the convention as well as creating general awareness and alertness on the CWC among the general citizens and stakeholders. In addition to these, Bangladesh expects the following support from OPCW for effective implementation of the CWC.  
a. 
Basic and Advanced training courses on assistance and protection of CW. 

b. 
Training course for the security forces on the application of riot control agents in accordance with the purposes not prohibited under the CWC 

c. 
Provide detection and decontamination equipments 

d. 
More coordination is required for joint NBCD exercises at the national and regional level. 

e. 
Expert and technical support regarding CWC 


7. Mr. Chairman, we reassert our full commitment to the Convention and pledge adherence to its noble objectives. We would also like to reiterate our full support to the OPCW's efforts in achieving universal adherence to the Convention and render all possible help and assistance to the OPCW in its vision of the development of chemistry for peaceful purposes.  
3 

9. I thank you all ladies and gentlemen. 

OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.1 30 November – 4 December 2009 30 November 2009 ENGLISH and SPANISH only 
MEXICO 

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR JORGE LOMÓNACO,  
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF MEXICO, AT THE  
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES  

Mr Chairperson, 
I wish to express my sincere congratulations on your election as Chairperson of this Fourteenth Conference of the States Parties and assure you both my full support and personal collaboration, and those of my delegation.  I am sure that your experience and diplomatic skills will lead us to a successful conclusion of this Conference.  At the same time, I wish to take this opportunity to thank your predecessor, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya, Permanent Representative of Japan to the OPCW, for his able conduct of the Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties. 
Mr Chairperson, 
This is the last Conference of the States Parties for our dear Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter.  Mexico wants to take this opportunity to pay tribute to his leadership. Ambassador Pfirter has led the Organisation for the past seven years, more than half the time since the establishment of the Organisation twelve years ago.  He has worked strenuously, together with his team, to run very efficiently and effectively the Organisation in its administrative, financial, and technical aspects, making it a success story in the multilateral scene. 
One of the most important results of such a skillful management has been that, for the past four years, the Organisation has been able to operate with a zero nominal growth budget without compromising either the efficiency of the Organisation or the objectives of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  
Mexico rests assured that in the remaining months of his tenure, Ambassador Pfirter will make use of all of his fine diplomatic skills and his extensive multilateral experience as he has done throughout his outstanding career.  Consequently, we offer the permanent support of Mexico to Rogelio Pfirter.  
Mr Chairperson, 
We should begin our deliberations today with the earned satisfaction of having been able to finalise our work in the Executive Council, in preparation for this Conference, in time and in 
CS-2009-6190(E) distributed 02/12/2009 *CS-2009-6190.E* 
C-14/NAT.1 page 2 
very good spirits, including the decision to recommend by consensus to this august body theappointment of Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü as the next Director-General of the Organisation for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons.  
During the process for this appointment, many delegations stated the importance of consensus and their commitment to select the best candidate.  These are indeed highly desirable objectives but more often than not, limited to the rhetoric and, in similar circumstances, rarely acted upon.  Except that, in this case, we did it.  In the end, we made no distinction whether a candidate came from one region or another, stayed away from groupings, and avoided a feared North-South confrontation, so divisive and damaging that has managed to steer other organisations away from their core objectives.  
But let us be fair, this outcome is not the merit of anyone in particular, but the result of the collective effort of members and non-members of the Executive Council, as well as of delegations, their respective capitals, and the candidates themselves, all of which chose to put the interests of the Organisation before their personal or national expectations.   
We should all be proud of our level of cooperation and our ability to work as a team, which is rarely seen in other international organisations.  In dealing with the many, complex subjects before us, we had worked very hard, hand in hand, against all odds, and managed to overcome our differences by means of our traditional way of doing business in OPCW, even in complicated situations: consensus.  We stuck to it and we all won.   
So today, in keeping alive such sense of belonging, commitment, and shared responsibility, our Organisation is stronger than ever and in better shape to face the very difficult challenges that lay ahead. 
Mr Chairperson, 
During the past century Mexico has vigorously promoted and been committed to multilateral negotiations as a mean to foster international peace and security.  The 21st century is not different. Weapons of mass destruction still exist, and the threat of their use remains until the international community gets rid of this scourge and of the possibility of developing and producing them.  
Let us not forget that the international community spent many years negotiating this Convention. Each and every paragraph of the Convention was a product of painstaking negotiations that sometimes required finding a fine balance among extreme positions or was an outcome of subtle political commitments.  As a result of this hard work, the Convention finally entered into force almost thirteen years ago, establishing a unique and successful verification system implemented by the OPCW.  
However, we are less than two and a half years away from the extended final deadline for the complete and verifiable destruction of all chemical weapons by possessor States Parties under the provisions of the Convention.  We know, by now, that this may not happen.  One State Party has already informed the Executive Council that it may not be able to conclude the destruction of all its chemical weapons on time, and there are signs that indicate that there might be another.  For Mexico, this is a cause of serious concern as it attaches to destruction the outmost importance.  Therefore, Mexico encourages all States Parties to engage in an open and transparent dialogue to deal with such a possibility.  It should be a dialogue which 
C-14/NAT.1 page 3 
must avoid politicising the discussion because, in Mexico’s view, the paramount consideration is to safeguard the integrity of the Convention.  This upcoming debate should thus strengthen, not debilitate the Convention.   
Thank you. 
- - - o - - -


OPCW 	Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.2 30 November – 4 December 2009 30 November 2009 ENGLISH only 
REPUBLIC OF CUBA 

STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF THE MEMBER STATES  
OF THE NON-ALIGNED MOVEMENT THAT ARE STATES PARTIES  
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION AND CHINA AT THE 
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES  

Mr Chairperson, 
1. 	
On behalf of the Members of the Non-Aligned Movement that are States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention, and China (the NAM CWC States Parties and China) I would like to welcome you as Chairman of this Conference of the States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention.  We are confident that your knowledge, skills, and experience will enable you to steer our work to a successful conclusion and I assure you of the full support of the NAM CWC States Parties and China.  

2. 	
I also take this opportunity to thank the outgoing Chairperson, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya, Ambassador of Japan, for his dedicated work as Chair of the Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties.  I also wish to congratulate the newly elected Bureau members of this Fourteenth Session of the Conference. 

3. 	
I would also like to convey our appreciation to the Director-General, Mr Rogelio Pfirter, for the presentation of his opening statement, which shall facilitate the deliberations of this important Conference. 

Mr Chairperson, 

4. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China express their commitment to the full and non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention.  We reiterate our long­standing principled position for the achievement of complete disarmament, and for international peace and security, including those expressed in the Final Document of the Fifteenth Summit of the Non-Aligned Movement, which took place in July this year in Cairo, Egypt. 

5. 	
Accordingly, the NAM CWC States Parties and China wish to outline their position on important issues before the OPCW, with particular emphasis on the agenda of this Fourteenth Conference of the States Parties to the Convention. 


CS-2009-6189(E) distributed 02/12/2009 	*CS-2009-6189.E* 
C-14/NAT.2 
page 2 

Mr Chairperson, 
6. 	
The existence of weapons of mass destruction continues to pose a threat to international peace and security. The NAM CWC States Parties and China reiterate their call for general and complete disarmament, under strict and effective international control, including the prohibition and elimination of all weapons of mass destruction in line with the first preambular paragraph of the Convention.   

7. 	
We stress that the total destruction of chemical weapons is one of the fundamental pillars of the Convention.  In this regard, compliance with the deadlines of destruction of all chemical weapons, including abandoned chemical weapons, within the final extended deadline, as set forth in the Convention, constitutes an integral part of the obligations by the chemical weapons possessor States and by abandoning States Parties. 

8. 	
As more than 48% of chemical weapons stockpiles are still to be destroyed and the destruction of a significant number of abandoned chemical weapons is yet to start, the NAM CWC States Parties and China express their serious concern about the pace of destruction of chemical weapons, as well as the destruction of abandoned chemical weapons, in light of the fast-approaching final deadline, by 29 April 2012, as extended by the Eleventh Conference of the States Parties and the Forty-Sixth Session of the Executive Council, respectively.  Consequently, the NAM CWC States Parties and China reaffirm that verification of the remaining chemical weapons stockpiles and of their destruction, shall continue to be one of the main tasks of the Technical Secretariat. 

9. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China express their grave concern over the fact that, according to the available reports, the United States of America may not be in a position to meet the final extended deadline for the destruction of its chemical weapons stockpiles, which endangers the credibility and the integrity of the Chemical Weapons Convention. We, therefore, urge all possessor States Parties to take every necessary measure to ensure compliance with the final extended deadline for the destruction of all their chemical weapons stockpiles. 

10. 	
We are of the firm belief that this Conference, in line with the decision taken at its Eleventh Session, and as underlined by the Second Review Conference, shall once again reiterate the obligation of possessor States Parties to complete the destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles, in order to comply with the final extended deadline of 29 April 2012. 

Mr Chairperson, 

11. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China note with satisfaction the progress made towards achieving universality of the Convention.  In this context, we wish to congratulate Iraq, the Dominican Republic, and the Bahamas, who acceded to the Convention during 2009, thus bringing the number of States Parties to 188. 

12. 	
We firmly believe that the effective contribution of the Convention to international and regional peace and security can be enhanced through the universality of the Convention. 

C-14/NAT.2 page 3 

13. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China wish to express their appreciation to the States Parties which have contributed to universality-related activities. We also commend the Technical Secretariat for its efforts to promote the universality of the Convention, which is fundamental to the attainment of its object and purpose.  We urge all States that have still not joined the Convention to do so without further delay, particularly those whose non-adherence to the Convention has given rise to serious concern. In this regard, we request the Secretariat and those States Parties in a position to do so, to intensify their efforts with a view to achieving full universality at the earliest possible date. 

Mr Chairperson, 

14. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China recall the importance of the provisions of Article XI of the Chemical Weapons Convention, underlined by the Second Review Conference, and emphasise that the full, effective, and non-discriminatory implementation of this Article is essential for the realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention. 

15. 	
We reiterate that the promotion of international cooperation in the exchange of chemicals, equipment, and scientific and technological information in the field of chemical activities, aimed at facilitating economic and social development, is fundamental for the achievement of the objectives of the Convention. 

16. 	
We stress the obligation of States Parties to implement the Convention in a manner that avoids hampering the economic or technological development of States Parties as well as international cooperation in the field of chemical activities for purposes not prohibited under the Convention. 

17. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China strongly believe that it is imperative to ensure the removal of and to avoid the imposition of any restrictions that are contrary to the letter and spirit of the Convention, which prevent access to materials, equipment, and technology required by developing States Parties for their continued and peaceful development.  Such restrictions affect the Convention’s long-term viability and have an adverse impact on the trust existing among States Parties.   

18. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China reiterate their call for the fulfilment of the solemn undertakings given at the time of the adoption of the Convention for removal of unwarranted restrictions in the field of trade in chemicals, equipment, and related technologies for peaceful purposes amongst States Parties.  In this context we call upon the developed countries to commit to the transfer of technology, material, and equipment for peaceful purposes in the chemical field and the removal of discriminatory restrictions.  We emphasise that the objectives of the Convention can be best achieved through multilaterally negotiated, universal, comprehensive, and non-discriminatory agreements by all States Parties.   

19. 	
We recall the relevant decisions of the Tenth, Eleventh, and Twelfth Conferences of the States Parties on the full implementation of Article XI, as well as the recommendations made by the Second Review Conference of the Convention on this fundamental provision.  

C-14/NAT.2 page 4 

20. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China welcome the resumption of consultations on the full implementation of Article XI and wish to assure the facilitator of this important endeavour of their full support.  We also welcome discussions to organise a workshop to explore ways and means of the full, effective, and non-discriminatory implementation of Article XI.  We are of the view that such a workshop is one of the steps that would contribute to consultations on the full implementation of Article XI. To this end, the NAM CWC States Parties and China stand ready to engage in substantive deliberations with all States Parties to finalise all aspects of the proposal. In doing so, we are confident that the views of all States Parties shall be taken into account. 

21. 	
We recall that the Conference at its Twelfth Session requested the Council pursuant to its previous decision to continue its intensive consultations at regular intervals to develop concrete measures within an agreed framework to ensure the implementation of Article XI. We stress that an agreed plan of action is an essential tool for the full implementation of Article XI.  The experience gained by the Organisation in the implementation of other provisions of the Convention through action plans, namely for Article VII and universality, shall guide us in this regard. 

Mr Chairperson, 

22. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China reaffirm that the implementation of Article X of the Convention on assistance and protection against chemical weapons makes a significant contribution to countering the threats of the use of chemical weapons. We stress the importance of achieving and maintaining a high level of readiness of the OPCW to provide timely, adequate, and effective assistance and protection to its States Parties in situations of use or threat of use of chemical weapons against them.  In this context, the NAM CWC States Parties and China support the ongoing preparations for the third OPCW exercise on the delivery of assistance, ASSISTEX 3, to be held in Tunisia from 11 to 15 October 2010 and encourage States Parties to actively participate therein.   

23. 	
While paying due respect to the chemical weapons victims and their families, the NAM CWC States Parties and China reiterate their firm conviction that international support for providing special care and assistance to all victims suffering the effects of exposure to chemical weapons is an urgent humanitarian need and that the States Parties to the Convention, as well as the OPCW, should pay urgent attention to meeting such needs.  In this regard, we look forward to the start of discussions on the proposal for the establishment of an international support network for the victims of chemical weapons.   

24. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China believe that the contribution to global antiterrorism efforts in the context of the Convention can be best achieved by the full, effective, and non-discriminatory implementation of all provisions of the Convention. In this regard, the promotion of the universality of the Convention, as well as the full implementation of Article X, continues to be of particular importance.  We also highlight the significance of international cooperation in the context of the Convention in preventing terrorists from acquiring and/or using chemical weapons. 


C-14/NAT.2 page 5 
Mr Chairperson, 
25. 	
The verification regime of the OPCW plays an important role in the implementation of the relevant provisions of the Convention.  The NAM CWC States Parties and China are committed to participate in the ongoing consultations regarding some of the unresolved issues related to industry verification.  

26. 	
We stress the relevant paragraphs of the report of the Second Review Conference (RC-2/4) with regard to declaration and inspection of OCPF sites.  The NAM CWC States Parties and China reiterate the desirability of directing inspections towards facilities of greater relevance to the object and purpose of the Convention, and that any proposals to be considered regarding this subject shall exclude the possibility of additional declaration obligations and shall correspond strictly with Part IX of the Verification Annex of the Convention, which is based on the concept of hierarchy of risk. 

27. 	
Furthermore, as it was reiterated in the Report of the Second Review Conference (paragraph 9.66), any changes in the frequency of OCPF inspections, if required, should take into account any refinements to the OCPF inspection regime or improvements in site-selection methodology, and should be based on a thorough discussion and a decision of the policy-making organs.  The NAM CWC States Parties and China recall decision C-13/DEC.5, and stress that the number of Article VI inspections should be determined within the consultations on the relevant Industry Cluster issues and be agreed by the States Parties as a matter of policy, taking into account budgetary and other relevant considerations.   

28. 	
We recall that the modified methodology for the selection of other chemical production facilities for inspection, currently being implemented by the Technical Secretariat, is considered by the NAM CWC States Parties and China as an interim measure, which needs to be thoroughly discussed and adopted by consensus. Therefore, we call for an early appointment of facilitators on the OCPF site-selection methodology, as well as on the issue of the frequency of inspections, with a view to reaching consensus, as expressed in the report of the Fifty-Fourth Session of the Executive Council (EC-54/5). 

Mr Chairperson, 

29. 	
This Fourteenth Session will undertake a review of the plan of action on the implementation of Article VII adopted at the Eighth Session of the Conference of the States Parties.  The NAM CWC States Parties and China welcome the important achievements made with regard to implementation of Article VII obligations during the present year, as reflected in the report by the Director General on the status of implementation of Article VII (EC-58/DG.5).  The significant progress attained through a constructive and cooperative approach since the adoption of the plan of action as well as the adoption of C-10/DEC.16 at the Tenth Conference bears testimony to its success.       

30. 	
In this context, we encourage all States Parties and the Technical Secretariat to continue to provide meaningful assistance and technical support to States Parties, at their request, and to devise appropriate solutions to overcome the practical difficulties 


C-14/NAT.2 page 6 
and resource constraints encountered by individual States Parties in carrying out their national implementation measures.  
31. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China are of the view that indicators used in the periodic reports of the Technical Secretariat on the implementation of Article VII obligations should only reflect elements that relate directly to the implementation of this Article.  We are of the view that clear guidance on the use of appropriate indicators should be reflected in the documents of this Conference.  

32. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China wish to recall paragraph 15 of decision C-8/DEC.16 on the plan of action on the implementation of Article VII obligations, which urges States Parties to review their existing regulations in the field of trade of chemicals in order to render them consistent with the object and purpose of the Convention. We also believe, in line with this decision, that Technical Secretariat reports on the implementation of Article VII obligations should include detailed information on the reviews undertaken by States Parties in this regard.   

33. 	
In terms of Agenda item 16 on administrative and financial matters, the NAM CWC States Parties and China recall that the employment of personnel in the Technical Secretariat is to be fair and transparent.  In this context and in accordance with Article VIII, paragraph 44 of the Convention, it is important that the Technical Secretariat observe an equitable geographical representation, particularly at the professional level.  In order to assess the impact of the tenure policy on the functioning of the Organisation and on the composition of its staff, we would like to receive detailed information on this matter, as well as updates of the Technical Secretariat documents on the composition of its staff.  

Mr Chairperson, 

34. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China are pleased to endorse the recommendation of the Executive Council at its Fifty-Eighth Session achieved by consensus, that Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü of Turkey be appointed to the position of Director-General of the OPCW for a four-year term, starting from 25 July 2010.  We would like to commend Ambassador Oksana Tomová in her former capacity of Chairperson of the Executive Council, as well as Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco Tonda, the current Chairperson of the Executive Council, for their contributions to the successful conclusion of this process.  

35. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China would also like to extend their sincere gratitude to Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter for his leadership, commitment, and important contribution to the work of this Organisation during his tenure as Director-General.    

36. 	
The NAM CWC States Parties and China shall support the incoming Director-General of the OPCW in the fulfilment of his responsibilities, particularly in times when important challenges to the Convention are likely to arise.  We emphasise the significance of dedicating growing attention to issues which are of the utmost importance to developing countries and to improving the balance in the implementation of all provisions of the Convention, in order to uphold its integrity and credibility. 


C-14/NAT.2 page 7 
Mr Chairperson, 
37. 	It is the clear wish of the NAM CWC States Parties and China to renew the assurances of our fullest cooperation to you and to all Member States in ensuring the success of this Conference. We would like to request that this statement be issued as an official document of the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties. 
I thank you. 
- - - o - - -
STATEMENT OF CANADA 
FOURTEENTH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

DELIVERED BY  
H.E. AMBASSADOR JIM WALL 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF CANADA 
TO THE 
ORGANISATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

THE HAGUE 
DECEMBER 1, 2009 

Mr. Chairperson, Mr. Director-General, Excellencies, and distinguished Delegates: 
I should like to join with the other speakers in warmly congratulating you on your election as President of the Fourteenth  Session of the Conference of States 
- 2 ­Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention. I am sure your diplomatic skills will 
enable us to achieve a successful outcome.  
The number of States Parties has continued to increase and, at 188, we are drawing ever closer to the goal of universality. Last year Canada provided funds to the OPCW to pursue its outreach activities in an effort to assist the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas with their ratification processes. Canada is especially pleased to see that both countries have since ratified the Convention and that all countries of the Americas are now members of the CWC. 
Mr.Chairperson, 
As Chemical Weapons destruction nears completion, the non­proliferation dimension of the CWC is becoming increasingly prominent and we welcome the progress made in Industry Cluster consultations on outstanding issues. After more than ten years of consultations, an agreement was finally reached on guidelines on low concentration limits of Schedule 2A and 2A* chemicals. Once approved by the Conference of 
- 3 -
States Parties, this decision should be implemented as soon as possible.  We will be monitoring closely its implementation by Member States. 
With the full support of the Canadian chemical industry, the Canadian National Authority voluntarily implemented in 2008 the Technical Secretariat’s initiatives on enhancement of  declarations of Other Chemical Production Facilities. We hope that the new product subcategory codes will be used by the Technical Secretariat for the selection of sites for inspection in 2010. Canada strongly encourages all Member States to agree on these proposals or implement them on a voluntary basis.  Canada is pleased to have contributed more than $23,000 CDN towards the two-day Workshop on “Matters Related to Other Chemical Production Facilities”, which took place just prior to this Conference. We believe that this workshop contributed to a better understanding by all Member States of the relevance of OCPF verification regime to the object and purpose of the Convention and its contribution to non-proliferation and confidence building.   
Greater efforts should be made by Members States to resolve transfer discrepancies identified by the Technical Secretariat. This labour-intensive task 
- 4 ­requires Member States to cooperate with each other in order to reconcile as much as possible quantities of declared transferred chemicals. This year, efforts  undertaken by the Canadian National Authority in cooperation with other National Authorities led to the identification of previously unknown Schedule 2 plant sites and trading companies. Canada attaches great importance to clarifying transfer discrepancies and encourages the Technical Secretariat to continue its efforts to seek clarifications from States Parties. Mr. Chairman,  The obligation of chemical weapons possessors to declare and verifiably destroy all their chemical weapons stockpiles within established deadlines is a central provision of the Convention.  Considerable progress has been achieved since the last session of the Conference of States Parties in the destruction of stockpiles of chemical weapons and we welcome the determination of possessor states to do their outmost to meet their destruction obligations.  Canada is providing assistance to the Russian Federation at the Kizner Chemical Weapons Destruction Facility pursuant to a $100 million CDN commitment made by Prime Minister Stephen Harper at the 2006 G8 Summit in St. Petersburg. In closing, Mr. Chairperson, I would like to take this opportunity to underline the superb work done by the Director General, Mr. Rogelio Pfirter, over the past 
- 5 ­
eight years in making the OPCW an organisation that enjoys an enviable reputation in credibility in the disarmament and non-proliferation community. I would like to extend a warm welcome to his successor, Mr. Ahmet Üzümcü. I wish to reiterate Canada’s commitment in working with the new Director-General and the Technical Secretariat to pursue efforts to implement fully and effectively the Convention. 


STATEMENT BY INDIA 
14th Session of the Conference of the States Parties 
Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
November 30 – December 4, 2009 
The Hague, Netherlands 

STATEMENT BY AMBASSADOR MANBIR SINGH 
Permanent Representative of India to the OPCW and Leader of the Indian Delegation to the  14th Session of the Conference of the States Parties November 30 – December 4, 2009 
Mr. Chairman, Mr. Director General, Distinguished Delegates: 
My delegation joins me in congratulating you on your chairing the 14th Conference of the States Parties.  We are confident that under your leadership, we will have a successful Conference.  I would like to extend to you the full support and cooperation of my delegation. 
2. 
May I also convey my delegation’s deep appreciation to the outgoing Chairperson, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan, for his dedicated work as Chairman of the Thirteenth Conference of the States Parties. 

3. 
I would like to thank the Director General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, for his comprehensive and detailed report and acknowledge the significant progress made by the organization over the past years under his leadership.  Since this is the last Conference of the States Parties with him as the Director General, we would like to commend him for his capable and dynamic leadership as well as commitment to meet the objectives of the Convention. 

4. 
We also welcome Ambassador Ahmet Uzumcu as the next Director General and have confidence that he would lead the organization on to higher levels of achievement. We look forward to the Technical Secretariat having a cohesive and a well functioning team, which while giving due consideration to merit will keep in view the importance of geographical representation. It is imperative to have an inclusive management, which gives due representation to developing countries.  We assure full support to Ambassador Uzumcu in his work and wish a smooth transition.  

5. 
I would also like to take this opportunity to express our appreciation for the efforts undertaken by Ambassador Jorge Lomonaco Tonda, Chairperson of the Executive Council, who successfully conducted the process of appointment of the Director General with great sagacity. 

Mr. Chairman, 

6. 
My delegation fully endorses and associates itself with the statement delivered by the distinguished Ambassador of Cuba on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China. 

7. 
India warmly welcomes the new Member States of Bahamas, Dominican Republic, Iraq and Lebanon, who have joined the organization since the 13th Session of the Conference of the States Parties.  We also congratulate the States Parties of Bahamas, Comoros and the Dominican Republic for setting up their National Authorities.  Such efforts greatly strengthen our organization as we move towards our common objective of achieving the universal adherence to the Convention.  

8. 
With a membership of 188 countries, the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) is the only universally acceptable multilaterally negotiated, non­discriminatory disarmament instrument with provisions to eliminate comprehensively an entire category of weapons of mass destruction under effective compliance and verification within a specified time frame. We have the responsibility to ensure that this Convention continues to be a success.   

9. 
It is important in the life of any organization that we reflect on its working and look back at the achievements and challenges encountered during the past years. The First and the Second Review Conference provided an important framework for such reflections.  The successful outcome of the Second Review Conference represented a strong renewal of commitment by all States Parties to the Convention in its entirety ensuring the balanced implementation of all its aspects.  We need to move in the direction chartered by the Second Review Conference. We also have to see that in our work methods, we ensure that there is no research and development on futuristic chemical weapons. 

Mr. Chairman, 

10. 
Elimination of chemical weapons is the primary objective of this Convention.  India attaches great importance to the elimination of chemical weapons and their facilities in accordance with the prescribed time lines. India’s credentials in the area of destruction of chemical weapons are well known.  We destroyed 100% of category 1 chemical weapons on 16th March, 2009 well within the extended deadline of April 28, 2009, under the stringent verification regime of the Organization.  I would like to thank Director General, Ambassador Pfirter, and Ambassador Magnusson of Sweden in his capacity as holding the Presidency of the European Union for felicitating India for its achievement. 

11. 
Having destroyed all our chemical weapons stockpiles within the timeline prescribed by the Convention and lived up to our obligation, we hope that other States Parties would also live up to their obligations.  Full compliance of the Convention with respect to this core objective is a serious issue, deserving our urgent attention. We are concerned at the prospect of some States Parties not being able to meet the final deadline. With the final extended deadline for complete destruction in April 2012 already in sight, the possessor States Parties will need to work really hard to meet this commitment and fulfil their obligations under the Convention. We expect nothing less.  This is essential to uphold the integrity and credibility of the Convention.  We look forward to deliberations on this issue in this Session. 

12. 
Having gained substantial technical expertise during the long and strenuous efforts put in by us for completely destroying the stockpiles of chemical weapons, we would be happy to share this expertise with other States Parties who are on the path to destroy their chemical weapons stockpiles within the time limits set by the Convention.   

13. 
Our laboratories and experts keep themselves abreast of the latest trends in Chemistry and Chemical Technology. India has emerged as a major provider of mass spectra for the OPCW Central Analytical Database, at a competitive cost. We would like to devote the services of our experts and laboratories to provide training for effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention by the States Parties. The Associate Programme hosted by India during the last two years was a success and is proposed to be continued. 

14. 
India welcomes and supports the programme to strengthen cooperation with Africa and would like to contribute in this process. As one of the steps, India would be willing to offer a course on issues related to chemical emergencies and promoting safety.  

Mr. Chairman, 

15. 
There have been important developments in the chemical industry verification regime.  There are a number of industry cluster issues which call for urgent attention and early resolution.  These include issues with divergent views, like proposed expansion of the OPCW Central Analytical Database to include unscheduled chemicals, enhancement of OCPF declarations, site selection methodology, frequency of inspections and risk assessment.   We are happy to note that the issue pertaining to Schedule 2A/2A* has been resolved and will get the approval of this Conference. The other issues also call for early action by appointment of facilitators. The modifications announced by the Director General 

to the OCPF site selection methodology followed by the Technical Secretariat have taken effect from January 2008 as an interim measure.  We would like to reiterate the need for continued consultations on this subject to reach an early decision by the States Parties. 

16. 
We recognize the importance of Organization’s verification activities in ensuring that the destruction of chemical weapons as well as the conduct of non­prohibited chemical activities of the States Parties is in accordance with the provisions of the Convention.  The Convention clearly outlines the provisions for the verification of relevant chemicals and industry facilities in accordance with the hierarchy of risks posed by them to the object and purpose of the Convention. A careful reading of Article VI of the Convention (Paragraphs 3 -6) makes it clear that a clear distinction exists between the scheduled chemicals and facilities and the unscheduled ones.  

17. 
It is also essential to remind that the wide variations in the frequency, periodicity, percentage or proportion of inspections of scheduled and unscheduled chemicals and their facilities are suggested in the Convention itself. The Convention, therefore, should guide us in deciding the number and distribution of Article VI inspections.  We need to recognize that nearly 60% inspections are directed towards the OCPFs – that is more than the total inspections of the scheduled facilities.  Our discussions on this subject should be viewed in this perspective. 

Mr. Chairman, 

18. 
This Conference will consider and approve the OPCW Programme and Budget for 2010.  While we endorse the Programme and Budget, we need to remember that the Programme and Budget is not - and is not meant to be - the instrument for formulation of policy.  Formulation of policy is an independent and separate exercise.  Till such a policy or change in policy is adopted based on consensus, it would be only reasonable to expect that the Draft Programme and Budget reflects the policy and position already being followed and as per inter-se priority set out in the Convention. 

Mr. Chairman, 

19. 
An important issue on the agenda is the implementation of Article XI on economic and technological development.  Successful implementation of this Article would be of direct benefit to all States Parties and would contribute to achieving the objectives of universality and national implementation measures by all States Parties. We, therefore, expect that the Conference would be able to 

adopt a forward-looking decision on this issue. We need to move beyond generalities and to give effect to the substantive issues which the Convention lists, within a set timeframe.  We welcome the proposal for holding a workshop as one of the steps in this direction. 

20. 
During the twelve years of entry into force of the OPCW, the Organization has gained considerable expertise not only in the process of destruction of chemical weapons but also knowledge relating to the peaceful use of chemicals. Generating economically useful knowledge from the activities of the OPCW and disseminating it to the States Parties as a byproduct of the Organization’s activities, would be a great help in enhancing international cooperation for peaceful uses of chemistry under the Convention.   

Mr. Chairman, 

21. 
One of the important issues concerns review of the Plan of Action on the Implementation of Article VII obligations adopted by us at the Eighth Conference of the States Parties. We welcome the important achievements made with regard to implementation of Article VII obligations as reflected in the Director General’s report on this Article.  However, there are States which are yet to fulfill their obligations under the Action Plan. 

22. 
India will like to see all States Parties implement their obligations under Article VII of the Convention fully and effectively.  We believe that the approach to achieve this objective should be one of encouragement and cooperation. This approach has yielded positive dividends in this area and States Parties are continuing to make progress in putting into effect national implementation measures. 

Mr. Chairman, 

23. 
This Conference clearly has a substantive agenda before it. We look forward to constructive discussions and assure you, once again of the Indian delegation’s cooperation and support as you guide our deliberations.   

24. 
I would request that this Statement be circulated as an official document of the Conference.  


 Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
STATEMENT BY H.E. MR. J.E. HABIBIE 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF THE REPUBLIC OF INDONESIA 
TO THE ORGANIZATION FOR THE PROHIBITION OF CHEMICAL WEAPONS 

TH
TO THE 14SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES 
Mr. Chairman, 
Let me take this opportunity to extend our sincere felicitations to you in assuming the Chairmanship 
of this year's Conference of States Parties. We are confident that under your able stewardship the 
Conference would lead to a successful conclusion. 

My delegation also wishes to commend the outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya for his 
chairmanship of last year's Conference. 

Before going further, my delegation wishes to associate itself with the statement made by 
Ambassador Oscar de los Reyes of Cuba on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China. 

Mr. Chairman, 
Since the inception of this Convention, the CWC indeed plays an integral part in the promotion of 
peace and security. It is worth noting that the CWC is moving closer towards universality, as we all 
welcome Bahamas, Dominican Republic, Lebanon and Iraq for joining in this important endeavor. We 
are hoping that few more countries that are now still outside of the Convention could join us with no 
further delay. 

Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation wishes to underscore Indonesia's steadfast commitment to this Convention. Thus far, 
Indonesia has passed its national law on the use of chemical and the prohibition on use of chemical 
as weapons. It is only a matter of time that a Permanent National Authority will be established as a 
draft Presidential Decree is on the final stage. It is worth noting that during the 11th National 
Authorities Meeting held recently, one of the objectives is to promote cooperation amongst National 
Authorities at a regional and sub-regional level. This is a very commendable measure so as to pave 
way for an efficient and effective functioning body in the discharge of its duties. 

Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation further wishes to underline, again, the balance among the pillars of the CWe. First, 
our efforts for a world free of chemical weapons require for all States Parties to adhere and 
strengthen the national implementation measures called for under the Convention. In this regard, we 
express grave concern that the progress made for the destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles 
and production facilities amounts little as we approach to the final deadline set forth on 29 April 
2012. We urge the possessor States to observe the final deadline. Destruction of chemical weapons 
stockpile is one of the foremost objectives of the Convention, therefore it would be best if we all 
could explore the possibilities to work extra mile in accelerating the process. 

1 
Second, effective verification is a necessity for attaining non-proliferation and confidence building. 
Indonesia has no interest in possessing chemical weapons. Time and time again, the OPCW has 
conducted, with satisfactory results, verification and inspections in various industrial sites in 
Indonesia. 

Third, International Cooperation and Assistance, for us, is the foremost element for a free and 
legitimate trade of chemicals. Much to our regret, such a trade is still hampered by forms of 
unwarranted restrictions. We stress the importance of exchange information, expertise and 
technological transfer of chemicals for peaceful purposes, and international cooperation for the 
purpose of improving capacity building. For countries like Indonesia which has no intention to 
develop, produce, stockpile of use of chemical weapons, they must be benefitted from joining the 
Convention among other by having international cooperation aiming at enhancing the economic and 
technological development in the field of chemical activities for purposes not prohibited under this 
Convention. 

Mr. Chairman, 
My delegation is pleased to endorse the recommendation made by the Executive Council at its 58th 
session that Ambassador Ahmet Uzumcu of Turkey be appointed to the position of the Director 
General. I wish to quote what our incumbent Director General Pfirter stated, that the consensus 
decision held during the recent 58th session of the EC, the Executive Council reaffirmed the OPCW as 
an example of successful multilateralism, demonstrating the maturity and profound unity of purpose 
which the Organization has attained in its mission. For this, we wish to commend Ambassador 
Oksana Tomova in her capacity of Chairperson of the EC as well as Ambassador Jorge Lomonaco 
Tonda, current Chairman of the Executive Council for steering the process towards a successful 
conclusion. 

Allow me further to seize this opportunity to applaud and praise Director General Rogelio Pfirter for 
the outstanding achievements in advancing the objectives of the Convention. May I warmly convey 
our highest compliments to Director General Pfirter for a job well done. 

Rest assured of Indonesia's steadfast cooperation and support under the stewardship of the 
incoming Director General of the OPCW. In addition, Indonesia hopes that the next Director General, 
in the execution of his mandate, would bear in mind the aspirations and interests of developing 
countries -which constitute a majority of state parties to the CWC, including in filling important 
posts from capable individuals to the Secretariat of this organization from developing countries. We 
are hoping to contribute more to this organization, and looking forward to a higher representation 
among this group in the organization. 

Mr. Chairman, 
May I echo the distinguished speakers who preceded me in conveying our full support and 
cooperation to you for the successful conclusion of this esteemed Conference. 

I thank you. 

2 



OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.9 30 November – 4 December 2009 1 December 2009 ENGLISH only 
THE ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF IRAN 

STATEMENT BY MR GHOLAMHOSSEIN DEHGHANI, SECRETARY OF THE 
NATIONAL AUTHORITY FOR THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION, AT THE 
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

Mr Chairperson, 
Distinguished representatives, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
Please allow me, Mr Chairperson, to begin by congratulating you on your well-deserved election as the Chairperson of this august body.  I am confident that with your diplomatic skills and leadership, our deliberations at this session of the Conference will come to a successful conclusion. 
I would like to express my appreciation for the endeavours of the former Chairperson of the Conference, H.E. Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan.  I also thank the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, and his colleagues in the Technical Secretariat for their efforts in preparations for this session of the Conference. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Coming to the agenda before us, let me first associate myself with the statement made by 
H.E. Ambassador Oscar Ramos of Cuba on behalf of the NAM CWC States Parties and China. 
The international community has paid dearly for reaching an agreement on the Convention as the unique global disarmament instrument.  The negotiations during which the Convention was concluded were inspired by the shocking memories of mankind of the use of different types of weapons of mass destruction during the twentieth century.  The most recent example of barbarism of the modern times was the massive use of chemical weapons against the Iranian military and the civilian population during the invasion of Iran by the former regime of Iraq. 
These inhumane attacks left about 100,000 dead or chemically-wounded casualties.  To learn about this horrifying experience, you are kindly invited to pay a visit to the photo exhibition organised to this effect in the lobby of the World Forum Convention Centre by the Iranian victims of chemical weapons.  
CS-2009-6195(E) distributed 11/12/2009 *CS-2009-6195.E* 
C-14/NAT.9 page 2 
With the connivance of some developed States, the former regime of Iraq was equipped with the different types of chemical weapons which led to such a horrific tragedy.  Unfortunately, more than 20 years after this tragedy those individuals and companies from some developed States who helped the former regime of Iraq to commit such atrocities are yet to be brought to justice. 
Looking at the pictures of the wounds of the victims of chemical weapons and talking to those who are still trying to survive in the face of gradual painful death, helps you to have a better understanding that our unsparing efforts aimed at full implementation of the Convention stem from the very bitter experience in our recent history, which goes far beyond a mere legal undertaking. 
Mr Chairperson, 
We are holding this Conference almost 13 years after the entry into force of the Convention. The Convention has four pillars, namely: 
-Destruction of chemical weapons stockpiles; -Assistance and protection against the use or threat of use of chemical weapons against States Parties; -Promotion of international cooperation amongst States Parties in the field of the peaceful use of chemistry; -Verification of activities not prohibited under the Convention.   
Mr Chairperson, 
Complete destruction of chemical weapons and chemical weapons production facilities is most essential for realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention.  Unfortunately, the original deadline of 29 April 2007 set for implementation of this important provision was missed, and upon request by the possessor States, the Eleventh Session of the Conference made a very difficult decision to grant the possessor States Parties the extended deadlines.  
We appreciate the efforts by those possessor States Parties who complied with their obligation in this regard within their respective deadlines.  However, this important provision of the Convention is yet to be implemented.  With the final extended deadline of 29 April 2012 approaching, the recent alarming indication by the United States of America that it may not be able to meet the final extended deadline for the complete destruction of its chemical weapons stockpiles has become a source of serious concern.  
Possessor States Parties have an unequivocal commitment to destroy their chemical weapons within the deadlines stipulated in the Convention.  This commitment is not just a theoretical obligation. There would be obvious moral, political, and legal consequences for deviating from such an essential commitment.  Any breach of the provisions of the Convention would consequently endanger the trust which exists among States Parties.  We should avoid sowing the seeds of mistrust by allowing the breach of the Convention, which is detrimental to realisation of the goals of the Convention.  Recognising the fundamental importance of this obligation, no justification of non-compliance with this undertaking, under various pretexts by a State Party, would be permissible. 
C-14/NAT.9 page 3 
The OPCW decision-making organs, especially the Conference of the States Parties, have a significant role in ensuring compliance of possessor States Parties with their obligations.  
The Executive Council has mandated its Chairperson to conduct consultations on this important issue.  We are of the firm belief that working groups should be established to not only consider different aspects of this issue, including legal and technical aspects, but also  to discuss and recommend concrete measures to ensure compliance of possessor States Parties with the final extended deadline of 29 April 2012 for destruction of their chemical weapons. 
Time is of essence, and we have a joint responsibility to engage in this process in good faith to ensure the success of the Organisation. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Article X of the Convention as one of the unique legal frameworks for promotion of collective security through global joint efforts was actually the major motive for many of the States Parties to join the Convention.  Provisions of this article remain the driving force for promotion of the universality of the Convention due to the protection and assistance that it provides to its States Parties. 
The efficiency and readiness of the Organisation in responding to requests for assistance, especially with regard to the needs of the victims of chemical weapons, are of utmost importance as stipulated in various documents adopted by its policy-making organs.  
We should not forget that the state of readiness to be achieved by the Organisation could not be realised without reliable resources being made available to the Organisation by States Parties, and those States Parties in a position to do so should take responsibility in this regard.   
The invaluable experience of Iran in treating victims of chemical weapons has been repeatedly offered to the States Parties through regular courses organised by the Technical Secretariat of the OPCW.  The last course of this kind was held last year in Tehran with participation of medical doctors from the States Parties. 
We have made this offer of assistance available to the Organisation through a contract which makes it much more reliable in nature than the other existing offers and we invite other States Parties also to do so. 
The Executive Council has been mandated by the Conference to explore concrete measures for implementation of Article X.  We are looking forward to receiving the recommendations of the Executive Council on this issue. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Another important pillar of the Convention is the promotion of free trade and cooperation among the States Parties in the field of peaceful use of chemistry as envisaged in Article XI as well as in the preamble to the Convention.  
Despite this provision, we are witnessing that for political reasons certain Member States are applying double standards by imposing arbitrary extra conventional restrictions on exchange of technology, material, and equipment for peaceful purposes against other States Parties C-14/NAT.9 page 4 
whose activities under the verification mechanism of the Convention and their compliance with their obligations have always been certified by the OPCW.  In this regard, we emphasise the importance of realisation of paragraph 2(e) of Article XI of the Convention.  
Unfortunately, restrictions are being imposed on States Parties, while the Zionist regime, whose non-adherence to the Convention is a source of serious concern, in the very sensitive region of the Middle East, has been provided with free access to materials to which some of the developing States Parties have no uninhibited access.  
Recalling the mandate given to the Executive Council to explore all options and submit to the Conference for its consideration concrete measures for the full implementation of Article XI, we appreciate the efforts made by the facilitator for Article XI, Mr Chen Kai of China, and we are looking forward to seeing the result of the work of the Council in this regard as a matter of priority. 
With ever-increasing needs of the developing countries as well as a number of States Parties, the Organisation shall allocate within its regular budget additional resources to enhance the activities of the International Cooperation and Assistance Division to meet the needs of developing States Parties. 
We appreciate and encourage voluntary contributions by States Parties for the activities conducted by the ICA. However, we are of the firm belief that the programmes of the ICA must rely on the regular budget of the Organisation to ensure predictability of the resources as well as to enable the Organisation to prioritise its activities as mandated by the policy-making organs.  
With the increasing needs of developing Member States, we should have sufficient and reasonable resources allocated for the programmes of the ICA within the regular budget. 
Mr Chairperson, 
I should say that in the face of such shortcomings, fortunately we have had significant achievements in implementing Article VI and some other provisions of the Convention, in particular, Article VII. We are pleased that, since the entry into force, the Organisation has been able to verify in States Parties, activities that are not prohibited under the Convention in an efficient and successful manner, which we owe to the efforts of the Technical Secretariat and to the cooperation of all States Parties.  
In light of the above-mentioned facts, we are of the firm belief that balanced implementation of the Convention should be our guiding principle in our work in order to ensure the achievement of the object and purpose of the Convention. 
Mr Chairperson, 
In terms of tenure policy, my delegation is of the view that staff recruitment at the Technical Secretariat shall be subject to the highest standards of transparency, fairness, competence, efficiency, integrity, merit, as well as equitable geographical representation as stipulated in the Convention. 
C-14/NAT.9 page 5 
Some representatives may assign paramount consideration to merit rather than equitable geographic representation, arguing that the staff with merit is preferable to geographical representation whereas one may just as well argue that people with merit can be found in any geographical representation. Hence, my delegation is of the belief that a combination of both merit and geographical representation should be given due consideration, particularly at the managerial level. 
Last but not least, I would like to turn to the important issue of the appointment of the next Director-General of the OPCW.  
We appreciate the efforts made by the outgoing Director-General, H.E. Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, during his tenure. We wish him every success in his future endeavours.  
As for the incoming Director-General, Ambassador Üzümcü, may I add the felicitations of my delegation to the many he has already received on his appointment to the position of Director-General. This is the sort of appointment that inspires confidence in the OPCW.  It seems to me that the States Parties to the OPCW should also be congratulated on their choice. I am confident that Ambassador Üzümcü will be a credit to those who supported him. I would also like to assure him of the full support and cooperation of my delegation.  We are confident that with the support and cooperation of all the States Parties, the incoming Director-General will be able to promote the implementation of the Convention in a balanced manner.  The good offices of the Director-General could play a significant role in bridging the gaps in the different views of the States Parties regarding the implementation of provisions of the Convention. 
In conclusion, may I request that this statement be circulated as an official document of the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties. 
Thank you, Mr Chairperson. 
- - - o - - -


OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.10 30 November – 4 December 2009 30 November 2009  Original: ENGLISH 
JAPAN 

STATEMENT BY H.E. MR MINORU SHIBUYA, 
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF JAPAN TO THE OPCW, AT THE 
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

Mr Chairperson, 
Distinguished delegates, 
Director-General, 
Let me begin by congratulating Your Excellency Ambassador Vaidotas Verba on your election as Chairperson of  this session of the Conference of the States Parties.  I am confident that the Conference will be most successful under your strong leadership and experienced diplomatic skills.  I assure you of our delegation’s full support and cooperation. 
I also wish to extend our delegation’s warm welcome to His Excellency Ambassador 
Aizaz Ahmad Chaudhry to the Chair of the Committee of the Whole. 
I would also take this opportunity to congratulate His Excellency Ambassador 
Jorge Lomónaco Tonda, and Her Excellency Ambassador Oksana Tomová, for their excellent 
work as Chairpersons of the Executive Council during the course of this year. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Since the end of the last session of the Conference of the States Parties, much progress has been made for the realisation of the objective and purpose of the Convention.  I would like to underscore the four countries which have newly become Member States to the Convention and to extend my delegation’s warm welcome to them. 
With the advance of universality, it is becoming increasingly difficult to induce the remaining States not Parties to join the Convention.  However, for the purpose of complete elimination and non-proliferation of chemical weapons, our efforts to accomplish universality should be sustained.  
Mr Chairperson, 
National implementation of the Convention by all States Parties is another pillar for the realisation of the object and purpose of the Convention.  In this regard, we welcome the report by the Director-General on the status of implementation of Article VII.  It helps us to recognise to what extent we have achieved and how much is left for us to work on. 
CS-2009-6217(E) distributed 11/12/2009 *CS-2009-6217.E* 
C-14/NAT.10 page 2 
Through this report, we could see that much progress has been made, especially in designating or establishing National Authorities.  However, more progress needs to be made. I encourage those States Parties that have not implemented fully Article VII of the Convention to do so as soon as possible. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Taking into consideration the increasing threat of terrorism, along with the complexity and rapid changes as a result of recent dramatic developments in the chemical industry, there is an increasing risk of intentional misuse of chemical substances by non-State actors as well as an accidental chemical disaster.  In order to prevent these chemical crises in facilities, I believe it is useful to share among States Parties the best practices on how to prevent and how to react to such chemical disasters through the international cooperation activities of the Organisation. 
It is from this viewpoint that Japan co-organised with the Technical Secretariat the seminar on chemical process safety management and chemical security this month in Tokyo.  During this seminar, active discussions were held on chemical management by gaining the participation of experts from various communities including the Japanese chemical industry. We shared the best practices of major Japanese chemical companies accumulated through their daily efforts for effective safety management. 
I believe that this seminar was the first attempt at shedding light on the issue of chemical process safety and security by the Organisation and ourselves and marked a significant step forward. It is our hope that other States Parties will start focusing on this issue based on the outcome reached by this seminar and further advance the fruitful discussions. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Another important task is the adoption of the 2010 Programme and Budget.  As you might recall, Japan has always been in favour of an effective and efficient Organisation.  In this context, we welcome the draft Programme and Budget for 2010 prepared by the Technical Secretariat and adopted by the last Executive Council, which is, in our delegation’s view, balanced and effective with zero nominal growth. 
I congratulate the Technical Secretariat for their excellent work and encourage continued efforts for the utmost use of the limited resources by constantly reviewing the human and financial resource allocation, using a scrap-and-build approach, along with the changing environment of the Organisation.  
Mr Chairperson, 
During the course of the industry cluster meetings this year, we also made significant progress. Namely, during the Fifty-Eighth Session of the Executive Council, we have finally reached a consensus after having made many compromises on the issue of low concentration threshold for Schedule 2A/2A* chemicals, which had been discussed for almost 10 years.  
Thus, we now need to address more on other industry cluster issues, above all the OCPF inspection issue.  We still have a lot of issues to resolve including improvement of OCPF site selection for inspection of sites more relevant to the object and purpose of the Convention.  It is the view of our delegation that the industry cluster issues should be discussed in a balanced manner in close cooperation with the chemical industry. 
C-14/NAT.10 page 3 
Mr Chairperson, 
I would like to take this opportunity to extend my appreciation and respect to the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter.  Since 2002, under his able leadership, we have achieved much progress in implementing the object and purpose of the Chemical Weapons Convention. I congratulate, with appreciation, all the contributions and the achievements that the Director-General, Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, has made during the course of his term.  I assure you of my delegation’s fullest and continuous support and cooperation during the rest of his term. 
In its last session, the Executive Council reached a consensus on the appointment of the new Director-General and recommended Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü as the new Director-General to this Conference.  I would like to extend my respect and appreciation to His Excellency Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco Tonda, Chairperson of the Executive Council, for his experienced leadership and diplomatic skill which guided us toward reaching the consensus. I am confident that this Conference would appoint the new Director-General by consensus as recommended by the Executive Council. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Destruction of Japanese abandoned chemical weapons in China continues to be assigned the highest priority in the light of its importance in the Convention.  
Japan has recovered and stored about 2,000 ACWs in the past 12 months in different locations for the sake of safety of the Chinese people as well as protection of the environment.  With this progress, the total number reached some 47,000.  
With regard to the mobile destruction facilities to be deployed at Nanjing, Japan has completed the manufacture of all components for these facilities.  In December the bidding process for their shipping and assembling will follow.  If the preparations go smoothly, Japan expects that the destruction of the first ACW will take place in the spring of 2010, which is of symbolic significance for Japan, after having made utmost efforts to address this issue with sincerity in accordance with the Convention. 
As for the biggest burial site of ACWs in Haerba-ling, during the course of this year, efforts are concentrated on building more durable infrastructures including roads to transport munitions, preparing the land around burial pits as well as conducting a survey using ground-penetrating radar to obtain a more accurate estimate of the burial condition of ACWs in Haerba-ling.  
With the indispensable cooperation of the Chinese Government, Japan would like to continue to make sincere efforts for the early destruction of ACWs. 
Mr Chairperson, 
We have a lot of issues to work through during this Conference.  I look forward to reaching a fruitful outcome through this important Conference with your strong leadership. 
I thank you, Mr Chairperson. 
- - - o - - -
Monday 30 November 2009 
NEW ZEALAND STATEMENT  
TO THE 14TH CONFERENCE OF STATES PARTIES  
TO THE CHEMICAL WEAPONS CONVENTION 

Delivered by Michael Green, Chargé d’affaires a.i., 
New Zealand Permanent Representation to the OPCW 

Mr Chairman, distinguished delegates, Director-General.  
New Zealand welcomes this opportunity to again place on record our support for the Chemical Weapons Convention, a key treaty in the multilateral disarmament framework. We commend the continuing efforts of States Parties to meet the Convention’s objectives.  We express our appreciation for the work of the Technical Secretariat. 
This will be Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter’s last Conference as Director-General. We thank him for his hard and productive work in this role.  The forthcoming change of Director-General draws attention to the considerable achievements of the OPCW under his leadership, while reminding us also of ongoing challenges his successor will face. 
The Director General has been tireless in his interaction with both States Parties and those States not yet party.  We welcome the progress that has been made in expanding adherence to the Convention, and encourage those states still outside the Convention to recognise the benefits that membership offers for their own security, as well as the contribution that universal adherence will make to global peace and security.  
National implementation of the Convention is fundamental to its effectiveness. We were pleased to see in the most recent report from the Technical Secretariat that increasing numbers of States Parties are taking steps towards full implementation. There is clearly still some distance to go, but the figure of 102 States Parties that have yet to enact legislation covering all areas belies the actual progress that is being made in drafting the necessary legislation.  Much of this is due to the assistance that the Technical Secretariat provides to States which face the constraints of small bureaucracies and competing political priorities, and to the information it provides on progress.  We look forward to this Conference taking a decision on Article VII that supports the continuation of this work. For its part, New Zealand will continue to promote commitment to full implementation, in particular in our region. 
We appreciate the pragmatic approach that the Director General has taken to preparation each year of the annual budget of the OPCW.  Maintaining zero nominal growth across five consecutive budgets is an achievement that 
New-Zealand.DOC 
2 

demonstrates the Secretariat’s prudent management of its financial and human resources. This prudence is especially welcome in view of the global financial situation. We consider that the Secretariat has increased its efficiency in recent years, with fewer staff serving more States Parties.  We commend the Director General’s ongoing efforts to strike a balance between the clear need to step up OCPF inspections and the organisation’s capacity to undertake additional inspections.  Monitoring and inspection of other chemical production facilities is an enormous task. This, in addition to the inspection of Schedule 1, 2 and 3 facilities, is a vital component of this organisation’s contribution to non­proliferation. New Zealand is keen to see an increase in the number of other chemical production facilities inspected in the future. 
At this Conference we expect to confirm the appointment of the next Director General, Ahmet Üzümcü, who will take up his position in July 2010.  The contact we have had so far with Ambassador Üzümcü gives us confidence in his ability to lead this organisation through the challenging times ahead. 
Foremost in our minds, as 2012 approaches, is the importance of intensifying efforts towards destruction of all chemical weapons.  For all states represented here, achieving the complete, verifiable and irreversible elimination of weapons of mass destruction is surely an important foreign policy goal.  We welcome the Executive Council’s decision at its recent session to start discussing issues related to meeting the final extended deadlines for the destruction of chemical weapons. We look forward to the Chair’s report on these consultations. 
We welcomed the productive outcomes of the 58th session of the Executive Council last month, at which agreement was reached by consensus on the appointment of the new Director General, the budget, and a number of destruction issues. Now that a decision and guidelines have emerged on the applicable concentration limits for mixtures containing Schedule 2A and 2A* chemicals, we are keen to focus in the industry cluster on enhancing the verification regime to allow the sites most relevant to the Convention to be accurately targeted. 
New Zealand looks forward to a similarly productive atmosphere in the week ahead. We hope for a cooperative approach among States Parties.  We encourage them to offer strong support for the Technical Secretariat without micro-managing its work. We think it is important not to divert attention from progress towards our shared goals: universal adherence, coupled with full and effective implementation of the Convention; the destruction of all existing chemical weapons; and maintenance of this position through an effective verification regime. 
Mr Chairman, I wish you well in your important task, and pledge the full support of the New Zealand delegation as we work towards a world free of chemical weapons. 
New-Zealand.DOC 
STATEMENT BY 
AMBASSADOR AIZAZ AHMAD CHAUDHRY,  
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE AND LEADER OF PAKISTAN DELEGATION 
 to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
at the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons 
Convention 
The Hague, 30 Nov – 4 Dec 2009 

Mr. Chairman,  
1. 
Allow me at the outset to congratulate you on your election as the Chairman of the 14th Conference of States Parties to the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC).  I assure you of my delegation’s full cooperation in ensuring the success of the Conference.  

2. 
To our outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan, we express our appreciation for the wise and skilful leadership that he provided.  

3. 
My delegation associates itself with the statement delivered by the Permanent Representative of Cuba, Ambassador Oscar de los Reyes Ramos, on behalf of the Member State Parties of the Non-Aligned Movement to the CWC, and China.  

Mr Chairman, 

4. 
The Director-General in his statement has provided to the Conference a comprehensive report on the progress made during the year in the implementation of the Convention. In addition to expressing our satisfaction at the dedicated manner in which the Technical Secretariat continues to perform its duties, I wish to place on record our deep appreciation for the services rendered to the OPCW by Director-General Rogelio Pfirter. 

5. 
During his tenure, the Director-General set an excellent example as the head of an important international organisation. He showed strong commitment to the goals of the Convention as well as political acumen in promoting the Organisation’s relations with a diverse membership and their sometimes competing demands. We wish him every success in his remaining term here and his future endeavours. 

6. 
The agenda of the Conference includes the appointment of his successor for which the Executive Council has unanimously recommended the name of an outstanding diplomat Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü of Turkey.  The strong consensus enjoyed by his candidature during the selection process at the Council, is clearly indicative of his high qualifications both professional and personal to lead the Organisation into the future. We look forward to the Conference appointing him by acclamation as the next Director-General of the OPCW.  

7. 
I would also like to recognize the high diplomatic skill of the Chairman of the Executive Council, Ambassador Lomonaco of Mexico, who led the selection process with dexterity and efficiency as well as thank all other candidates whose sincerity to serve the Organisation and its aims became even more obvious in the constructive manner in which they enabled the selection process to progress. 

Mr Chairman, 

8. 
As we begin another important session of the Conference, I reaffirm the high importance that my government attaches to the effective implementation of the only legal instrument in the area of weapons of mass destruction that comprehensively and without discrimination prohibits an entire category of such weapons under conditions of international verification.  

9. 
We, therefore, regard the effective implementation and strengthening of the CWC as vital to preserve its validity as an exemplary means of dealing with challenges of disarmament and non­proliferation. 

10. 
The acceptance of the Convention by 188 countries testifies to the validity of the principles and motivations on which it is based. We warmly welcome Lebanon, Iraq, the Dominican Republic and the Bahamas, who acceded to the CWC since the last Conference of States Parties. One of the key challenges for the OPCW is to attract the adherence of those who are yet to become States Parties. And it is our hope that they would do so in the near future. Universality of the Convention is critical to ensure that the norm against chemical weapons is accepted globally and without exception. 

11. 
The Director-General and the Secretariat have run an effective and successful campaign to promote the Convention’s universality and we request them to sustain their efforts for outreach and awareness with the remaining States in order to achieve the goals of the Action Plan on Universality.  

12. 
The other crucial challenge before us is to ensure that the disarmament obligations set forth in the Convention are fully respected. There has certainly been considerable progress in destruction of declared stockpiles of chemical weapons by the possessor States. However, we note that destruction of more than 45 percent of the Chemical Weapons stockpiles remains outstanding and needs to be completed before the final extended deadline of April 2012. 

13. 
Destruction of one category of chemical weapons i.e. old and abandoned chemical weapons also requires continued serious attention. 

14. 
We believe that verification of the destruction of the remaining chemical weapons stockpiles should remain the foremost priority of the Organization. It would be premature to shift the focus from destruction to non-proliferation at this stage. 

15. 
It is by now clear that one or more of the possessor States will default on the obligation to meet the final destruction deadline. This poses a real dilemma as the integrity of the Convention is placed in competition with reasons that are delaying reaching the final goal. The policy making organs of the OPCW will have to engage in a serious discussion to find a resolution of this issue in a manner that will respect the integrity and credibility of the Convention.  The policy organs will have to carefully look at the nature of possible non-compliance, its objective causes and provide a remedy in accordance with the letter and spirit of the Convention. This much the Executive Council has already agreed on while tasking its Chairman to commence consultations on the issue.  

16. 
We are hopeful that under the able leadership of the Chairman of the Executive Council, the Council would be able to devise a solution acceptable to all in light of the Council’s guideline as contained in para 5.11 of its Report (EC-58/9 dated 16 October 2009) “that no action should be undertaken that would undermine the Convention or that would raise questions about the commitment of States Parties, or lead to the rewriting of or reinterpreting the Convention’s provisions”.  

17. 
Here we also emphasise that the obligations of the Convention must be respected at all times. Consultations on situations “unforeseen” under the Convention are currently underway. There is a need to have greater clarity, including possible legal opinion, to guide us better in this regard. We feel that if all States Parties remain true to the spirit of the Convention concerns such as those that led to such consultations can be fully addressed within the terms of the Convention that provides considerable authority to the policy making organs. 

Mr Chairman, 

18. 
The implementation of Article VII obligations remains an area of continuing work in accordance with the Plan of Action covering Article VII. We note with satisfaction the important achievements made with regard to implementation of Article VII obligations during this year as reflected in the relevant Report of the Director General (EC-58/DG.5). This significant progress demonstrates that the Plan of Action, based on a constructive approach, has served us well in furthering the implementation of the Article VII obligations. We support the continuation of this positive approach and will remain supportive of any constructive proposal that seeks to enhance the implementation of the Convention around the world in a cooperative framework. We express our appreciation for the important work undertaken by the Technical Secretariat and would encourage it to continue its efforts.  

19. 
For its part, Pakistan has put into place appropriate laws to implement its CWC obligations. And CWC implementation rules and regulations are at an advance stage of finalization. We have established an effective export control authority for all types of strategic materials.  Pakistan has also invested considerable resources in creating an effective National Authority and establishing a secure communication network called the Wide Area Network (WAN) that gathers various CWC related declarations and data from the industry and all other stakeholders. We appreciate the positive response by the Technical Secretariat to our offer of sharing our expertise in the electronic submission of declarations by organizing a regional training workshop in Pakistan next year.  We also look forward to hosting an international course on assistance and protection next year. Pakistan attaches utmost priority to chemical safety issues and is organizing capacity building workshops at the national as well as bilateral levels. 

20. 
We also hope to make positive contribution to the work of the Scientific Advisory Board through our recently selected expert. 

21. 
The Provisions of the Convention on international cooperation and assistance represent an important pillar of the Convention. Strengthening this column must remain a priority objective for our Organization. There is a rightful expectation of majority of the non-possessor developing States that by joining the Convention they would have access to chemicals, equipment and technology for peaceful purpose. That promise must be fulfilled. We would particularly like to express our concern that in contravention of Article X Para 3, there continue to be restrictions on access to Protective equipment. 

22. 
We believe that sensitive technologies and materials must be adequately controlled to ensure their use only for peaceful purposes. This is evident from our new comprehensive national legislation. However, this objective cannot justify practices and cartels which hinder trade in chemicals, equipment and technology among States Parties for demonstrably peaceful purposes. We need to restore balance and even-handedness in the implementation of the obligations under the Convention.  

23. 
We welcome the resumption of consultations on full implementation of Article XI which we hope will lead to the identification of concrete measure on implementation of Article XI. We reiterate our support to the proposal of holding a workshop to explore ways and means for full implementation of Article XI. The deliberations at the Workshop could also lead to the adoption of an Action Plan along the lines of successful plans in other areas. 

24. 
Effective verification of chemical industry is an essential feature of the confidence building provisions of the Convention. That is why Pakistan has spared no effort in ensuring that our obligations under the Convention are fully met and this is reflected in the smooth and successful conduct of inspections in Pakistan. I am pleased to inform that all our OCPFs and POE stakeholders remain fully prepared to receive routine industrial inspections through regular outreach visits by the National Authority. 

25. 
Over the years, the Technical Secretariat has accumulated a wealth of experience in the conduct of routine industrial inspections. In this regard, we would request that, without breaching the aspect of confidentiality under CWC, the Secretariat may regularly update State Parties on its experiences for the smooth and effective conduct of such inspections.  

26. 
We fully recognize and appreciate the efforts of the Technical Secretariat and State Parties in organizing important meetings and workshops at the international, regional and sub regional level. In order to enable all State Parties and relevant stakeholders to benefit from these important meetings, it is strongly recommended that the Technical Secretariat upload the presentations and reports on OPCW’s website. 

27. 
We note in the Director General’s Report no. EC-58/DG.5 that during first year of its implementation the modified site selection methodology has  generally performed in line with expectations and that more inspections have taken place in States Parties with larger number of plant sites as well as to facilities of greater relevance. While these trends are unexceptionable, we hope that this interim measure will eventually be replaced by a methodology agreed between States Parties as required under the Convention. In this regard, we look forward to early resumption of consultations on this issue to arrive at an appropriate decision that would provide an enduring basis to the site selection methodology.  

28. 
On the related matter of increasing the overall number of inspections of OCPF plant sites, we need to proceed with due care and deliberation keeping in full view the original intent reflected in the Convention which establishes a hierarchy of threats that different types of chemicals and related facilities pose to the object and purpose of the Convention. 

Mr. Chairman,  

29. 
This Conference is required to approve the Programme and Budget for the OPCW for 2010. We support the Budget 2010 and commend the Technical Secretariat for a generally balanced, zero-nominal growth budget. The draft Programme and Budget 2010 represents a step forward in the direction of results based budgeting and incorporates some of the recommendations of the external auditor as well as better formulations of core objectives and key performance indicators. We are satisfied to note that the difficult issues such as proposals to increase the number of OCPF inspections, which consumed substantial time and effort last year, and the approval at sub-programme levels were resolved in a constructive spirit. We reiterate our position that prior understandings in the dedicated consultations should be reached before such proposals are reflected in the budget.  

30. 
The question of the impact of the tenure policy would require our attention at this session. We trust that the tenure policy would not adversely impact the established benchmarks in the human resource management of the Secretariat as well as the operational requirements.  We are confident that the additional information requested by the States Parties on these issues will reconfirm that the relevant policies are being implemented with due regard to meritocracy, fairness in geographical distribution and the Secretariat’s need to preserve institutional memory in transfer of knowledge from incumbents to new staff members. 

31. 
We propose that in the interest of transparency and better human resource management, the Technical Secretariat may consider preparing regular annual reports on the composition of the Secretariat for the information of the State Parties. 

Mr Chairman, 

32. 
In conclusion, I wish to say that my delegation approaches this session of the Conference with considerable hope that the constructive spirit of consensus that has generally marked our work will be preserved once again for the success of this Conference which in turn strengthens the goals of the Chemical Weapons Convention. On our part, my delegation remains ready to contribute constructively towards reaching positive decisions on all issues before the Conference.  


Thank you 



OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.5 30 November – 4 December 2009 30 November 2009 ENGLISH only 
SWEDEN 

STATEMENT ON BEHALF OF THE EUROPEAN UNION 
BY H.E. MR HANS MAGNUSSON,  
PERMANENT REPRESENTATIVE OF SWEDEN TO THE OPCW, AT THE 
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

Mr Chairperson, 
Director-General, 
Distinguished delegates, 
Ladies and gentlemen, 
I have the honour and pleasure to speak on behalf of the 27 States Parties that are members of the European Union and the 11 countries that associate themselves with this statement:  This comprises candidate countries Croatia*, the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia*, and Turkey; potential candidates Albania, Montenegro, and Serbia, which participate in the stabilisation and association process; Iceland and Norway, members of EFTA and the European Economic Area; as well as Georgia, San Marino, and Ukraine. 
At the outset, let me first thank the outgoing Chairperson, Mr Minoru Shibuya of Japan, for the excellent way in which he handled last year’s Conference. Let me also welcome you to the Chair, Ambassador Verba.  We are pleased that a member of the European Union has been given the honour of guiding us through this important meeting.  The European Union offers you its full support throughout your tenure. 
The European Union would also like to extend a warm welcome to the new States Parties the Bahamas, the Dominican Republic, Iraq, and Lebanon.  The addition of four new States Parties, including one declared chemical weapons possessor State, strengthens the OPCW and the Chemical Weapons Convention.  The European Union renews its call on the States that remain outside the Convention to join in our common endeavour to rid the world of chemical weapons. 
* 
Croatia and the former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia continue to take part in the stabilisation and association process. 
CS-2009-6191(E) distributed 09/12/2009 *CS-20096191.E* 
C-14/NAT.5 page 2 
Mr Chairperson, 
Twelve years after the entry into force of the Convention, we are approaching the situation where chemical weapons stockpiles in States Parties are a thing of the past.  Consequently, as pointed out by the First and Second Review Conferences, the Organisation will soon have to shift its focus from destruction to other aspects of its work.  A number of important issues will need to be addressed as we continue down the track towards the implementation of all the provisions of the Convention. 
There is no doubt that considerable progress has been made since April 1997.  For instance: 
• 	
States Parties now represent about 98% of the world’s population.  

• 	
Only a small number of the States Parties have yet to assign National Authorities responsible for Convention implementation, and more than 5,000 facilities in 78 States Parties were declared in connection with the chemical industry verification regime. 

• 	
More than half of the combined declared stocks of chemical weapons have been destroyed, and three possessor States have destroyed all of the chemical weapons they declared to the OPCW. 

• 	
Almost all the capacity to produce chemical weapons has been dismantled in the States Parties concerned. Thousands of old and abandoned chemical weapons have been either destroyed or placed under the OPCW verification regime. 

However, it is equally clear that major challenges remain to be addressed, and let me give a few examples:  

• 	
Sustained and accelerated efforts by the possessor States are required in order to meet the deadlines for destruction of chemical weapons inscribed in the Convention.  

• 	
Outstanding initial declarations and required legislation bear witness to the need for improvement with regard to national implementation.  

• 	
As pointed out by the Second Review Conference, although the Convention verification system is sound, efforts to strengthen its efficiency and effectiveness, and to adapt it so as to take account of advances in science and technology, should continue. 

• 	
A number of the issues which, according to the Convention, have yet to be decided upon by the policy-making organs of the OPCW, still need to be brought to conclusion. 

• 	
The risk of terrorism with the use of toxic chemicals raises the question how the OPCW could best support States Parties’ efforts to build effective responses in that respect. 


Mr Chairperson, 
The Executive Council, under the exceptionally able chairmanship of Ambassador Tomová of Slovakia and Ambassador Lomónaco of Mexico, has done an excellent job preparing issues for us to consider at this year’s Conference.  A number of major challenges have been dealt with expeditiously and successfully—among them a recommendation for the appointment of the next Director-General and the submission of the 2010 budget.  The European Union welcomes the initiative by Brazil to mandate the Chairperson of the 
C-14/NAT.5 page 3 
Executive Council to engage in informal consultations related to the final extended destruction deadlines.  We also welcome the fact that it was possible to reach a consensus decision on declaration requirements for Schedule 2A and Schedule 2A* chemicals, following many years of negotiations.  We thank the Technical Secretariat for preparing the draft Annual Report for 2008, which has been endorsed and submitted for approval at this session.  These achievements bear witness to the unique spirit that characterises the work of the policy-making organs. 
Mr Chairperson, 
On 27 July 2009, the Foreign Ministers of the European Union adopted the European Union Council Decision on support for OPCW activities, which had been negotiated under the French and Czech presidencies. The Council Decision allocates EUR 2,110,000 to seven projects that reinforce OPCW programme priorities, while also contributing to the implementation of the European Union’s Strategy against Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction. This is the fourth such programme funded by the European Union.  It provides for continued support to a number of OPCW projects, but also contains new elements.  For instance, more than one quarter of the total amount, or EUR 550,000, will be used for a new activity in support of the OPCW’s Programme for Africa.  I am pleased to announce that, following the signing of the financing agreement earlier this month, the funds have been transferred to the OPCW, and that the implementation of the project has begun. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Through the Council Decision, the European Union continues to support projects that fall under various aspects of the Convention, including, notably, Article VII, Article XI, and universality. Not least set against that background, the European Union is very much in favour of a robust outcome from this Conference, including consensus decisions relating to all of these articles. We urge all States Parties to support the work of the facilitators and to work constructively towards a consensus outcome, in the tradition of this Organisation. 
With regard to the promotion of national implementation, the European Union reiterates its call on the Technical Secretariat to consider alternative innovative approaches that might prove effective and efficient. One such approach might be increased use of interregional events, including training at OPCW Headquarters, targeting relevant government officials. The European Union urges all States Parties that have not yet done so to provide all required information to the Technical Secretariat in a timely manner, in accordance with their obligations under the Convention. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Destruction of all chemical weapons remains a key objective of the Chemical Weapons Convention and an essential priority for the OPCW.  It is of utmost importance that the remaining possessor States continue to be mindful of their obligations, address their challenges effectively, and make every effort to complete destruction on time, within the framework of the Convention and its verification regime.  
The European Union congratulates India on its achievement of completing destruction of all chemical weapons declared to the OPCW.  India has worked tirelessly and consistently to meet its deadlines for destruction.  The successful conclusion of destruction activities reflects C-14/NAT.5 page 4 
the Indian Government’s commitment to meeting its international obligations, as well as the dedication and level of expertise of the team charged with the disarmament work.  
The European Union is prepared to support the request by the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya for extension of the deadlines for destruction.  In our statement to the Fifty-Eighth Session of the Executive Council, we called on Libya to provide further information about the plans, intentions, and projections on which the current extension request is based.  We appreciate the transparency shown by the Libyan delegation, by issuing document EC-58/NAT.5/Add.1, and encourage the Libyan Government to keep States Parties informed as it moves towards completion of destruction by 15 May 2011. 
We welcome the commitment of the Russian Federation to meet its destruction deadlines, and the forecast—now confirmed—that the 45% target will be met on time.  The European Union considers that visits by the Council to chemical weapons destruction facilities are useful measures of transparency and confidence building, and looks forward to proposals for a further such visit to the Russian Federation during 2010.  The European Union and its Member States continue to work closely with Russia with regard to the destruction facilities in operation and under construction.  We have noted the arrangements reached with regard to the endpoint of destruction and thickener contained in chemical weapons stocks.  We note, in particular, the Director-General’s statements that this does not detract from the State Party’s obligation to complete destruction on time, and that systematic verification at chemical weapons destruction facilities will continue until all the reaction mass containing Schedule 2 chemicals has been destroyed.  
The European Union welcomes the destruction, by the United States of America, of more than 65% of its chemical weapons stockpile, including 96.6% of nerve agents and 100% of binary chemical weapons.  The European Union also appreciates the high degree of transparency shown by the United States in its destruction programme, and its declared willingness to consider further confidence-building measures beyond its legal obligations. However, the European Union also attaches great importance to the deadlines for destruction. We therefore call on the United States to continue and, where necessary, accelerate its efforts towards the early completion of chemical weapons destruction activities in accordance with its international undertakings. 
Concerning disarmament in Iraq, the European Union regrets that it has not yet been possible to carry out the Technical Secretariat’s planned visit to prepare for verification activities.  We look forward to the submission of a draft detailed plan for destruction for the Council’s consideration and the launch of inspection activities, as soon as practicable. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Destruction of the weapons of the past must be accompanied by the prevention of new chemical weapons being developed in the future.  In particular Articles VI, VII, and IX of the Convention are vital pillars for pursuing the non-proliferation goals of the Convention.  
It is important to strengthen the industry verification regime.  The Second Review Conference recalled that the selection of a particular facility or plant site for inspection shall take into account, besides the risk posed by the relevant chemical, inter alia, the characteristics of the facility and the nature of the activities carried out there.  The European Union notes that some facilities producing discrete organic chemicals are using flexible 
C-14/NAT.5 page 5 
equipment capable of producing toxic substances, and would consider it important for the Technical Secretariat to be provided sufficient information in order to focus its inspections in this regard. We also note that only 2.6% of the inspectable OCPFs received inspections in 2008, and that at this rate it would take more than 30 years to inspect all such facilities declared to the OPCW. 
The Technical Secretariat needs to continue to improve its preparedness to carry out challenge inspections or investigations of alleged use.  To this end, and to increase the information available to laboratories in States Parties, the European Union believes that it is important to develop further the OPCW Central Analytical Database—the OCAD. 
The European Union recognises that the implementation of all articles of the Convention constitutes a tangible measure in our common endeavour to prevent, detect, and respond to acts of terrorism in the chemical field.  The activities of the OPCW are of great importance— in particular those leading to enhanced national implementation.  The European Union supports the role of the Technical Secretariat in this regard.  We also support the efforts of the Open-Ended Working Group on Terrorism to further this contribution within the framework of the existing mandate of the Convention, for instance, through the exchange of information on best practices.  We will continue to work closely with the new facilitator in the implementation of this task. 
The European Union has noted with satisfaction the Secretariat’s intention to hold ASSISTEX III in the second half of 2010, and welcomes the offer by Tunisia to host the exercise. Several European Union Member States have made offers of contributions to assistance efforts under Article X of the Convention, and we are looking forward to this important event.  We would also urge a focused approach that would enable the Technical Secretariat and States Parties to derive maximum benefit from ASSISTEX III. 
Mr Chairperson, 
Before concluding my remarks, I would like, on behalf of the European Union, to pay tribute to Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, since this is the last regular Conference during his tenure. Ambassador Pfirter has led the Technical Secretariat during a pivotal time, which has seen a steady increase in the number of States Parties and in the volume of work undertaken by the Technical Secretariat.  Ambassador Pfirter’s personal commitment and hard work have been instrumental in attaining these achievements, and in the OPCW’s ability to deal with the resulting challenges effectively and efficiently, under conditions of zero nominal budget growth. It is an Organisation in shipshape condition that he hands over to his successor at the end of his term.  The European Union extends its heartfelt thanks to Ambassador Pfirter andlooks forward to working closely with his successor, Ambassador Üzümcü, who is due to be appointed by the Conference at this session. 
In conclusion, Mr Chairperson, I would like to request that this statement be treated as an official document of the Conference of States Parties. 
Thank you, Mr Chairperson. 
- - - o - - -
Statement 
by His Excellency Mr. Virachai Plasai 
Permanent Representative of the Kingdom of Thailand 
to the Organization for the Prohibition of Chemical Weapons 
at the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties 
The Hague, 30 November 2009 
Agenda Item 8: General Debate 

Mr. Chairman, 
Mr. Director-General, 
Excellencies, 
Distinguished Delegates, 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 

1. 
First of all, let me join other delegations in congratulating you for your election as the Chairman of this year’s Session of the Conference of States Parties. I am confident that under your able chairmanship, this Session will proceed smoothly and lead to successful outcomes. Allow me also to extend to the outgoing Chairman, His Excellency Ambassador Minoru Shibuya, my delegation’s appreciation for his wise leadership and the good works achieved during the Thirteenth Session of the Conference of States Parties. 

2. 
I also wish to congratulate His Excellency Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter, Director-General of the OPCW, for his opening statement which is very comprehensive and encompasses all the important aspects of the Chemical Weapons Convention. In particular, I must express my delegation’s profound appreciation for his tireless efforts to promote the work of the OPCW to ensure full and effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  

Mr. Chairman, 

3. 
The continued existence of weapons of mass destruction poses a grave threat to humanity and international peace and security. The Kingdom of Thailand reiterates its unequivocal position on complete disarmament and non-proliferation of all types of weapons of mass destruction. We are firmly committed to the goals of the Chemical Weapons Convention and have rendered our full support to the work of the OPCW and the effective and non-discriminatory implementation of the Convention.  

4. 
The Kingdom of Thailand on its part has adopted various necessary measures to fully implement its obligations under the CWC in accordance with Article VII of the Convention. In particular, we have enacted the Hazardous Substance Act of 1992 and the second Hazardous Substance Act of 2001 to impose control measures on the production, acquisition, storage, use and transfer of toxic chemical substances and substances used to produce the toxic chemical substances specified in the CWC. Our National Authority has also been fully cooperating with the OPCW with regard to our 


2 

annual declaration of past and anticipated activities as well as inspections of Other 
Chemical Production Facilities sites. 
Mr. Chairman, 

5. 
The Kingdom of Thailand supports the universality of the CWC, which is reputed to be a highly credible and effective disarmament instrument aimed at a total elimination of chemical weapons. We are glad that this noble goal is now shared by 188 countries, with Iraq, the Dominican Republic, and Bahamas becoming States Parties to the Convention earlier this year. We urge the remaining States outside the Convention to ratify or accede to it without further delay. Only with universal adherence to and implementation of the Convention will we be able to rid the world of the potential harms of chemical weapons.   

6. 
The Kingdom of Thailand welcomes the dedication and commitment demonstrated by possessor States Parties to the achievement of the total destruction of their chemical weapons stockpiles and the progress made so far. We congratulate India for becoming the third possessor State to have completely destroyed its stockpile this year. However, it should also be noted that there remain approximately 48 per cent of declared chemical weapons to be destroyed by the extended deadline of April 2012. With the short time remaining before the deadline, we reiterate the importance of the completion of the destruction of chemical weapons within the agreed timeframe, as failure to do so would affect the credibility and effectiveness of the CWC. We therefore urge the remaining possessor States Parties to fulfill its obligations in a timely manner. 

Mr. Chairman, 

7. 
International cooperation and assistance is another important element within the CWC. The Kingdom of Thailand commends the OPCW’s continued hard work in organizing capacity-building activities under its international cooperation programmes to promote peaceful application of chemistry and legitimate activities of the chemical industry, which are of great importance for many countries, especially those with developing economy. International cooperation in the field of chemical activities including the exchange of chemicals, equipment, and scientific and technical information should also be promoted in accordance with Article XI on economic and technological developments. 

8. 
In this regard, The Kingdom of Thailand welcomes the resumption of consultations on the full implementation of Article XI and supports the initiative to organize a workshop next year with a view to developing concrete and appropriate measures towards that end. We look forward to cooperating closely with other States Parties and the OPCW to ensure the full, effective and non-discriminatory implementation of Article XI. 

9. 
To further enhance the object and purpose and the effective implementation of the CWC, cooperation should also be explored in the area of data sharing among National Authorities on imports and exports of Scheduled chemicals. Guidelines 


3 

could be developed in this regard and networking among National Authorities should be encouraged to enable them to more effectively monitor and control Scheduled chemicals. More importantly, through cooperation among the National Authorities, we should aim at eliminating any possibility of discrepancy between quantities of Scheduled chemicals declared by importing and exporting States Parties. 
10. 
In light of the expansion of chemical industries worldwide, the issues of chemical safety and security are also of high importance. Cooperation should be enhanced among chemical industries in States Parties in promoting safe and secure operation of chemical production, transportation and storage facilities. Also of great value would be capacity building and training programmes for States Parties in the prevention of chemical accidents as well as the management of chemical disasters and response to emergencies. 

11. 
Thai chemical industries attach great importance to industry safety and environmental management activities. Approximately 70 per cent of our chemical industries have adopted the “Responsible Care Global Charter” issued by the International Council of Chemical Association. We are ready to work together with other States Parties through sharing of information to contribute to safe and secure operation of the global chemical industry.  

Mr. Chairman, 

12. 
While the threat of use of chemical weapons  is receding, concerns have shifted to the possibility of non-state actors gaining access to or making chemical weapons. The OPCW has an important role to play in the international anti-terrorism efforts.  

13. 
Universal adherence to and full implementation of the CWC reduces risks of chemical weapons falling into the wrong hands, thereby contributing to the implementation of the UNSC Resolution 1540 and the UN Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy. The Kingdom of Thailand commends the OPCW for the continued cooperation it rendered to the 1540 Committee and other relevant UN bodies, including the Counter Terrorism Committee and the Counter-Terrorism Executive Directorate. 

Mr. Chairman, 

14. 
The CWC is seen by many as an example of achievement of the multilateral efforts on disarmament and non-proliferation. With our continued determination and commitment, it can also become a true success story of the international community. I wish to assure you, Mr. Chairman, of Thailand’s commitment to work closely and constructively with other States Parties and the OPCW towards the success of this Conference and the attainment of the goals of the Convention. 


I thank you. 


OPCW Conference of the States Parties 
Fourteenth Session C-14/NAT.7 30 November – 4 December 2009 30 November 2009 ENGLISH only 
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA 

STATEMENT BY DR ROBERT P. MIKULAK,  
UNITED STATES REPRESENTATIVE TO THE OPCW,  
AND THE HONOURABLE MR ANDREW C. WEBER,  
ASSISTANT SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR NUCLEAR AND CHEMICAL AND 
BIOLOGICAL DEFENSE PROGRAMS, AT THE 
FOURTEENTH SESSION OF THE CONFERENCE OF THE STATES PARTIES 

Mr Chairman,  
Mr Director-General, 
Distinguished delegates, 
I am pleased to be here once again among so many colleagues at the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties.  Our numbers here today demonstrate the importance and the strength of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  I warmly welcome our new Chairman, Ambassador Vaidotas Verba of Lithuania, and look forward to working with him in the coming year.  I have every confidence in his ability to skilfully guide us through our full agenda this week, and I pledge my own support and that of the U.S. Delegation to making this a productive and successful session.  I also extend my deep appreciation to our outgoing Chairman, Ambassador Minoru Shibuya of Japan, and thank him for his dedication and exemplary service to this Organisation over the past year.  In addition, I want to thank the Chairs of the Executive Council this year, Ambassador Oksana Tomová of Slovakia and Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco of Mexico, for their leadership and for the consensus recommendations now before the Conference.  As we begin this Conference, I would like to warmly welcome Lebanon, Iraq, the Dominican Republic, and the Bahamas as the newest Member States since the Conference last met in December 2008.   
Mr Chairman,  
Since this is the last Conference at which he will be with us, I would like to pay tribute to an outstanding colleague, one who is a diplomat, a statesman, and a leader:  Ambassador Rogelio Pfirter.  Ambassador Pfirter came to the OPCW at a time of crisis for the Organisation. Through his deft leadership, keen management, and organisational and diplomatic skills, Ambassador Pfirter moulded the OPCW into a world-class international organisation. On behalf of the United States, I would like to thank Ambassador Pfirter for his distinguished service and dedication. 
CS-2009-6198(E) distributed 09/12/2009 *CS-2009-6198.E* 
C-14/NAT.7 page 2 
Due in no small part to Ambassador Pfirter, the OPCW is widely recognised for its effective multilateralism and its ability to work steadily toward the global elimination of an entire category of weapons of mass destruction.  All of this has been done within the bounds of fiscal responsibility, as evidenced by his submission of the fifth consecutive zero-nominal-growth budget for our approval this week.  It is no small feat that all of this takes place within a culture of cooperation and consensus building.   
There is no better way to measure Ambassador Pfirter’s success as Director-General than to recall the number and superb qualifications of the candidates who sought to succeed him. The high calibre of the candidates did not make easy work for the Executive Council, but the Council successfully rose to the challenge and fulfilled its mandate to recommend one candidate in a fair, open, transparent, and consensual manner.  We particularly thank the Council’s Chairman, Ambassador Jorge Lomónaco of Mexico, without whose hard work, guidance, and leadership the task would have been much more difficult.  The Executive Council has recommended that this Conference appoint Ambassador Ahmet Üzümcü of Turkey to be the next Director-General.  The United States welcomes the Council’s consensus recommendation and looks forward to this Conference’s approval by acclamation of Ambassador Üzümcü’s appointment. 
Mr Chairman,  
In addition to making a consensus recommendation for the next Director-General, the Executive Council has accomplished much over the past year, as evidenced by the many items for approval on our agenda this week.  Another important consensus recommendation from the Council is for approval of the draft 2010 Programme and Budget.  This fifth consecutive zero-nominal-growth budget is a major accomplishment.  We congratulate Ambassador Pfirter on his efficient management and the entire Technical Secretariat for being able to meet all of the Organisation’s core objectives.  The United States looks forward to approving the draft 2010 Programme and Budget during our session this week. 
After more than ten years of on-and-off deliberations on guidelines for low concentration thresholds for Schedule 2A and 2A* chemicals, the Executive Council finally reached a consensus recommendation at its October session on setting declaration thresholds for these chemicals.  The United States fully understands that agreeing to this political compromise was not easy for some Member States, and we noted our own concerns when we agreed to join consensus on the decision in October. However, this decision represents a delicate compromise, and the United States encourages its adoption by the Conference during our session this week. With the conclusion of this long-outstanding issue, we call on all Member States to actively engage in resolving other long-outstanding issues related to strengthening and enhancing the Convention’s non-proliferation verification regime. 
Achieving universality is an important goal of this Organisation.  The number of Member States has grown remarkably in the twelve years since the Convention entered into force. While the number of States not Party to the Convention continues to shrink, the task of encouraging them to join clearly represents significant challenges.  All Member States, working together with the Director-General and the Technical Secretariat, should continue to engage in the outreach and assistance which have been so successful in signalling that being a part of this Convention is part of being a full member in the community of nations.  The United States welcomes the draft decision on universality before us this week, and we will be pleased to approve it. 
C-14/NAT.7 page 3 
However, acceding to the Convention and joining this Organisation is only the beginning of the story, and not the end. Article VII of the Convention requires Member States to implement fully the provisions of the Convention in their laws, regulations, and procedures. Since the adoption of the action plan for Article VII in 2003, there has been notable progress in the number of Member States fully meeting their Article VII obligations.  In particular, the United States welcomes the establishment and designation of national authorities during the past year by the Bahamas, Barbados, Comoros, Congo, the Dominican Republic, Honduras, Iraq, and Lebanon.  We urge the few remaining Member States which have not yet done so to establish and designate their National Authorities as rapidly as possible. 
The United States recognises that the work to fully implement Article VII is far from done, as evidenced in the Director-General’s annual report on Article VII implementation, which is before us this week. In responding to the Director-General’s report, we as Member States must consider what more can be done to address the current situation and meet the goals of the Article VII action plan.  As has become apparent since the adoption of the action plan, there is no one-size-fits-all solution.  Support, whether from the Technical Secretariat or Member States, is most effective when it is tailored to meet the individual circumstances of Member States.  The United States stands ready to provide support and Article VII technical assistance to any Member State requiring it. We share a collective interest in seeing each member of this Organisation enact and implement comprehensive legislation and regulations. Whenever another Member State takes this important step, another gap is closed, and our collective security is enhanced. 
We still have important work ahead of us this week.  Intensive consultations on Article VII, as well as Article XI, have continued since the October session of the Executive Council. There are dedicated, hard-working facilitators for both of these consultations, and we hope that as work continues this week, we can achieve consensus.   
Mr Chairman,  
This certainly has been an important year for this Organisation, and we have an equally important year ahead with many challenges and opportunities.  With an incoming Director-General, we face a critical period of transition that should be smooth, orderly, and transparent.  There also will be a change-over in the senior management of the Technical Secretariat, and the United States believes that the overall structure and balance of senior management has served the Organisation well and should be maintained.  Paramount consideration should be given to the highest standards of efficiency, competence, and integrity, with due regard given to geographical representation, when filling senior management positions.  As chemical weapons stockpiles are destroyed and the Organisation’s focus transitions from disarmament to non-proliferation, the next Director-General and his senior management will need to re-align the Organisation’s activities, personnel, and budget while maintaining the support of Member States.   
With this transition to a greater focus on non-proliferation, all Member States also will need to work cooperatively to achieve an effective balance in the industrial verification regime, including that of the regime for other chemical production facilities.  This regime was created by the negotiators of the Convention to capture a whole set of industrial facilities which were not Schedule 1, 2, or 3 facilities but which still potentially posed a significant risk.  Some of these facilities could be suitable for producing chemical weapons or even contain an embedded chemical weapons production mobilisation capability.  The framers of the C-14/NAT.7 page 4 
Convention understood this risk and did their best to create a verification regime for this category of industrial facilities. The regime is neither perfect nor complete, and it now falls to us to complete and perfect it. We should all look beyond inspection numbers and work together to achieve a regime that is focused on those facilities which pose the greatest risk. This should be one of the key tasks for the Executive Council in the coming year. 
Another area which deserves greater attention is strengthening the Organisation’s relationship with stakeholders and civil society, including industry and non-governmental organisations. In this context, we welcome the formation of the NGO Coalition which the Director-General has just mentioned in his statement.  As part of this process, we believe that holding some meetings to which all stakeholders are invited, along the lines of the very successful Experts Meetings for the Biological Weapons Convention, would pay real dividends to our work. This engagement would complement the role of the Organisation as a forum for consultation and cooperation among Member States, and certainly this framework could and should be used to exchange experiences and discuss issues related to chemical safety and security. Such discussions, drawing on the input of all stakeholders, could very well lead to new ideas and concepts for the implementation of Article X and Article XI, which would serve to strengthen this Organisation. 
Mr Chairman,  
I have spoken about a number of important items on our agenda this week.  We also will take up consideration of another fundamental goal of this Organisation: the total destruction of chemical weapons.  To address the United States’ contributions to this shared goal of the Organisation, it is my great pleasure to introduce the Honourable Mr Andrew Weber, Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Nuclear and Chemical and Biological Defense Programs.  
Thank you, Dr Mikulak. 
Mr Chairman,  
Mr Director-General, 
Distinguished delegates, 

I am pleased to join you today for the Fourteenth Session of the Conference of the States Parties. I assign great importance to the goals of the Chemical Weapons Convention and the shared efforts of all of my colleagues here today.  I have dedicated my career to making the world safer, protecting against weapons of mass destruction proliferation, and strengthening arms control regimes.  I echo the comments made by my colleagues honouring this Organisation as a model for effectively addressing the threat of chemical weapons, and I compliment its achievements under the extremely able leadership of Director-General Rogelio Pfirter. I also add my voice to the enthusiastic support for AmbassadorAhmet Üzümcü, the nominee to be the next Director-General of the OPCW.  
C-14/NAT.7 page 5 
Mr Chairman,  

Earlier this year, President Obama entrusted me to provide oversight and leadership of our 
domestic chemical weapons destruction programme.  This is no small task, as the United 
States possesses the second largest chemical weapons stockpile in the world.  The safe, 
effective, and environmentally-sound destruction of more than 27,000 metric tons of assorted 
chemical weapons is an enormous challenge.  However, it is one that we have made 
significant strides towards accomplishing, and I am proud to report on these achievements.    

We have met our 1%, 20%, and 45% treaty milestones.  
To date, we have destroyed 67.6% of our Category 1 chemical weapons, which includes 
85.3% of our chemical rockets, the destruction of 96.6% of our nerve agent, and destruction 
of all of our binary chemical weapons. 
We have destroyed all of our Category 3 chemical weapons. 
We have destroyed all of our former chemical weapons production facilities.  
We have completed destruction operations at three of our facilities.    
We have four destruction facilities currently operating at a cost of over USD one billion and 
two additional sites under construction. 
To date, we have provided an estimated USD 20.5 billion for the destruction of chemical 
weapons in the United States of America. 
Over the years, we have successfully addressed a wide range of safety and environmental 
concerns raised by local citizens living near our storage and destruction facilities and by state 
and local authorities.  

We have made every effort to ensure that our chemical weapons are destroyed consistent with 
the Chemical Weapons Convention; safely, without harm to workers, people living near the 
facilities, or the environment; verifiably, under the eyes of OPCW inspectors; and as rapidly 
as feasible. 

Mr Chairman,  

Let me assure you that the Obama administration is fully committed to examining all possible 
options for accelerating our chemical weapons destruction activities even further, consistent 
with the Chemical Weapons Convention and its applicable safety, technical, and 
environmental requirements.  In 2006, the United States reported that it expected to have 
only 66% of its stockpile destroyed by 2012. This is however a milestone we have now 
reached. We will continue to seek ways to accelerate the programme.   

As an example, we are now intensively assessing the possible use of small-scale well-proven 
technologies to supplement the neutralisation technologies planned at our two sites under 
construction located in Pueblo, Colorado, and Blue Grass, Kentucky.  We are consulting with 
members of the United States Congress and conducting outreach to the local citizens and 
stakeholders about this potential new destruction strategy.  We hope to have a decision on 
this strategy soon, and will keep you and the OPCW fully informed.   

The United States understands our obligations under the Convention, and we are fully 
committed to meeting the Convention’s objectives, including verified destruction of 100% of 
our stockpile as rapidly and as safely as possible.  We are also committed to proactive 
disclosure of our chemical weapons destruction programme, including schedule and cost 
data, so that Member States can evaluate our efforts for themselves.  To that end, we have 

C-14/NAT.7 page 6 
provided: 90-day reports for the past two-and-a half-years which track our progress made in three-month intervals; informal destruction presentations at every informal meeting of the Executive Council on chemical weapons destruction to offer frank and honest information on our programme, and one which I am pleased to provide here tomorrow at 2 pm; and site visits to our facilities, which allow an opportunity for representatives to observe the enormity and technical complexity of ongoing destruction efforts firsthand.  
The United States will continue to provide the transparency measures necessary to ensure that the Member States of this Organisation have confidence in our domestic efforts.   
Mr Chairman,  
The United States views the threat posed by chemical weapons as a global concern and one that necessitates action by the international community. While we place a determined focus on destroying our stockpile of chemical weapons, we also contribute to the larger international destruction programme as well.  
Through the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Program, which I have been able to spend much of my government career serving, the United States has contributed over a billion dollars to cooperative threat reduction programmes aimed at furthering the goals of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  Our projects in Russia range from the development of an analytical laboratory, to enhancing site security at Planovy and Kizner, to the destruction of former production facilities in Volgograd and Novocheboksarsk, and to the establishment of a chemical weapons destruction facility in Shchuchye.  The latter commenced destruction operations in March of this year and continues to perform at an impressive pace.  I offer my compliments to the Russian Federation for its continued efforts and to the international donor community who, through their generous contributions, reduced the global stockpile of chemical weapons.  I’d like to congratulate the Russian Federation and especially Viktor Kholstov on the achievement of their 45% destruction deadline.   
In addition to our partnership with the Russian Federation, the United States contributed over USD 45 million to assist the Republic of Albania in eliminating 16.6 metric tons of chemical weapons agents at Qaf Molle, destroying 100% of its stockpile in a verified manner.    
It is my hope to convey to you the commitment of the United States of America to the shared vision of the Chemical Weapons Convention.  It is our view that Member States ought to look within their borders to address their obligations under the Convention and look beyond their borders for opportunities to help meet the goal envisaged by the drafters of this Convention: a world free of chemical weapons.  
With Dr Mikulak, I request that our statements be circulated as one official document to the Conference. 
Thank you, Mr Chairman. 
- - - o - - -


